
--- PAGE 1 ---
Transformer Circuits Thread
AUTHORS
Nelson Elhage,Tristan Hume,Catherine Olsson,Nicholas Schiefer,Tom Henighan,Shauna Kravec,Zac Hatfield-Dodds,Robert Lasenby,Dawn Drain,Carol Chen,Roger Grosse,Sam McCandlish,Jared Kaplan,Dario Amodei,Martin Wattenberg,Christopher Olah
AFFILIATIONS
Anthropic,Harvard
PUBLISHED
Sept 14, 2022
* Core Research Contributor;‡ Correspondence to colah@anthropic.com;Author contributions statement below.
Toy Models of Superposition
∗ ∗ ∗ ∗
∗ ‡
Abstract: Neural networks often pack many unrelated concepts into a single neuron – a puzzlingphenomenon known as 'polysemanticity' which makes interpretability much more challenging. Thispaper provides a toy model where polysemanticity can be fully understood, arising as a result ofmodels storing additional sparse features in "superposition." We demonstrate the existence of aphase change, a surprising connection to the geometry of uniform polytopes, and evidence of a linkto adversarial examples. We also discuss potential implications for mechanistic interpretability.
We recommend reading this paper as an HTML article.
It would be very convenient if the individual neurons of artificial neural networks corresponded tocleanly interpretable features of the input. For example, in an “ideal” ImageNet classifier, eachneuron would fire only in the presence of a specific visual feature, such as the color red, a left-facing curve, or a dog snout. Empirically, in models we have studied, some of the neurons do cleanlymap to features. But it isn't always the case that features correspond so cleanly to neurons,especially in large language models where it actually seems rare for neurons to correspond to cleanfeatures. This brings up many questions. Why is it that neurons sometimes align with features andsometimes don't? Why do some models and tasks have many of these clean neurons, while they'revanishingly rare in others?
In this paper, we use toy models — small ReLU networks trained on synthetic data with sparse inputfeatures — to investigate how and when models represent more features than they havedimensions. We call this phenomenon superposition. When features are sparse, superpositionallows compression beyond what a linear model would do, at the cost of "interference" that requiresnonlinear filtering.
Consider a toy model where we train an embedding of five features of varying importancein twodimensions, add a ReLU afterwards for filtering, and vary the sparsity of the features. With densefeatures, the model learns to represent an orthogonal basis of the most important two features(similar to what Principal Component Analysis might give us), and the other three features are notrepresented. But if we make the features sparse, this changes:
1

--- PAGE 2 ---
This figure and a few others can be reproduced using the toy model framework Colab notebook in our Github repo
Not only can models store additional features in superposition by tolerating some interference, butwe'll show that, at least in certain limited cases, models can perform computation while insuperposition. (In particular, we'll show that models can put simple circuits computing the absolutevalue function in superposition.) This leads us to hypothesize that theneural networks we observein practice are in some sense noisily simulating larger, highly sparse networks. In other words, it'spossible that models we train can be thought of as doing “the same thing as” an imagined much-larger model, representing the exact same features but with no interference.
Feature superposition isn't a novel idea. A number of previous interpretability papers havespeculated about it , and it's very closely related to the long-studied topic of compressedsensing in mathematics , as well as the ideas of distributed, dense, and population codes inneuroscience  and deep learning . What, then, is the contribution of this paper?
For interpretability researchers, our main contribution is providing a direct demonstration thatsuperposition occurs in artificial neural networks given a relatively natural setup, suggesting thismay also occur in practice. We offer a theory of when and why this occurs, revealing a phasediagram for superposition. We also discover that, at least in our toy model, superposition exhibitscomplex geometric structure.
But our results may also be of broader interest. We find preliminary evidence that superposition maybe linked to adversarial examples and grokking, and might also suggest a theory for theperformance of mixture of experts models. More broadly, the toy model we investigate hasunexpectedly rich structure, exhibiting phase changes, a geometric structure based on uniformpolytopes, "energy level"-like jumps during training, and a phenomenon which is qualitatively similarto the fractional quantum Hall effect in physics. We originally investigated the subject to gainunderstanding of cleanly-interpretable neurons in larger models, but we've found these toy modelsto be surprisingly interesting in their own right.
[1, 2]
[3]
[4] [5]
KEY RESULTS FROM OUR TOY MODELS
In our toy models, we are able to demonstrate that:

--- PAGE 3 ---
Superposition is a real, observed phenomenon.
Both monosemantic and polysemantic neurons can form.
At least some kinds of computation can be performed in superposition.
Whether features are stored in superposition is governed by a phase change.
Superposition organizes features into geometric structures such as digons, triangles,pentagons, and tetrahedrons.
Our toy models are simple ReLU networks, so it seems fair to say that neural networks exhibit theseproperties in at least some regimes, but it's very unclear what to generalize to real networks.
Definitions and Motivation: Features,Directions, and Superposition
In our work, we often think of neural networks as having features of the input representedas directions in activation space. This isn't a trivial claim. It isn't obvious what kind of structure weshould expect neural network representations to have. When we say something like "wordembeddings have a gender direction" or "vision models have curve detector neurons", one isimplicitly making strong claims about the structure of network representations.
Despite this, we believe this kind of "linear representation hypothesis" is supported both bysignificant empirical findings and theoretical arguments. One might think of this as two separateproperties, which we'll explore in more detail shortly:
Decomposability: Network representations can be described in terms of independentlyunderstandable features.
Linearity: Features are represented by direction.
If we hope to reverse engineer neural networks, we need a property like decomposability.Decomposability is what allows us to reason about the model without fitting the whole thing in ourheads! But it's not enough for things to be decomposable: we need to be able to access thedecomposition somehow. In order to do this, we need to identify the individual features within arepresentation. In a linear representation, this corresponds to determining which directions inactivation space correspond to which independent features of the input.
Sometimes, identifying feature directions is very easy because features seem to correspond toneurons. For example, many neurons in the early layers of InceptionV1 clearly correspond tofeatures (e.g. curve detector neurons ). Why is it that we sometimes get this extremely helpfulproperty, but in other cases don't? We hypothesize that there are really two countervailing forcesdriving this:
[6]
Privileged Basis: Only some representations have a privileged basis which encouragesfeatures to align with basis directions (i.e. to correspond to neurons).
Superposition: Linear representations can represent more features than dimensions, using astrategy we call superposition. This can be seen as neural networks simulating largernetworks. This pushes features away from corresponding to neurons.
Superposition has been hypothesized in previous work . However, we're not aware of featuresuperposition having been unambiguously demonstrated to occur in neural networks before (demonstrates a closely related phenomenon of model superposition). The goal of this paper is tochange that, demonstrating superposition and exploring how it interacts with privileged bases. Ifsuperposition occurs in networks, it deeply influences what approaches to interpretability researchmake sense, so unambiguous demonstration seems important.
[1, 2]
[7]

--- PAGE 4 ---
The goal of this section will be to motivate these ideas and unpack them in detail.
It's worth noting that many of the ideas in this section have close connections to ideas in other linesof interpretability research (especially disentanglement), neuroscience (distributed representations,population codes, etc), compressed sensing, and many other lines of work. This section will focuson articulating our perspective on the problem. We'll discuss these other lines of work in detail inRelated Work.
Empirical Phenomena
When we talk about "features" and how they're represented, this is ultimately theory buildingaround several observed empirical phenomena. Before describing how we conceptualize thoseresults, we'll simply describe some of the major results motivating our thinking:
Word Embeddings - A famous result by Mikolov et al.  found that word embeddingsappear to have directions which correspond to semantic properties, allowing for embeddingarithmetic vectors such as V("king") - V("man") + V("woman") = V("queen")
(but see).
Latent Spaces - Similar "vector arithmetic" and interpretable direction results have alsobeen found for generative adversarial networks (e.g. ).
Interpretable Neurons - There is a significant body of results finding neurons which appearto be interpretable (in RNNs ; in CNNs ; in GANs), activating in response tosome understandable property. This work has faced some skepticism . In response,several papers have aimed to give extremely detailed accounts of a few specific neurons, inthe hope of dispositively establishing examples of neurons which truly detect someunderstandable property (notably Cammarata et al. , but also ).
Universality - Many analogous neurons responding to the same properties can be foundacross networks .
Polysemantic Neurons - At the same time, there are also many neurons which appear to notrespond to an interpretable property of the input, and in particular, many polysemanticneurons which appear to respond to unrelated mixtures of inputs .
As a result, we tend to think of neural network representations as being composed of features whichare represented as directions. We'll unpack this idea in the following sections.
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11, 12] [13, 14] [15]
[16, 17]
[6] [18, 19]
[20, 1, 18]
[21]
What are Features?
Our use of the term "feature" is motivated by the interpretable properties of the input we observeneurons (or word embedding directions) responding to. There's a rich variety of such observedproperties!We'd like to use the term "feature" to encompass all these properties.2
But even with that motivation, it turns out to be quite challenging to create a satisfactory definitionof a feature. Rather than offer a single definition we're confident about, we consider three potentialworking definitions:

--- PAGE 5 ---
Features as arbitrary functions. One approach would be to define features as any functionof the input (as in ). But this doesn't quite seem to fit our motivations. There's somethingspecial about these features that we're observing: they seem to in some sense befundamental abstractions for reasoning about the data, with the same features formingreliably across models. Features also seem identifiable: cat and car are two features whilecat+car and cat-car seem like mixtures of features rather than features in some importantsense.
Features as interpretable properties. All the features we described are strikinglyunderstandable to humans. One could try to use this for a definition: features are thepresence of human understandable "concepts" in the input. But it seems important to allowfor features we might not understand. If AlphaFold discovers some important chemicalstructure for predicting protein folding, it very well might not be something we initiallyunderstand!
Neurons in Sufficiently Large Models. A final approach is to define features as propertiesof the input which a sufficiently large neural network will reliably dedicate a neuron torepresenting.For example, curve detectors appear to reliably occur across sufficientlysophisticated vision models, and so are a feature. For interpretable properties which wepresently only observe in polysemantic neurons, the hope is that a sufficiently large modelwould dedicate a neuron to them. This definition is slightly circular, but avoids the issues withthe earlier ones.
[22]
3
We've written this paper with the final "neurons in sufficiently large models" definition in mind. Butwe aren't overly attached to it, and actually think it's probably important to not prematurely attachto a definition.4
Features as Directions
As we've mentioned in previous sections, we generally think of features as being represented bydirections. For example, in word embeddings, "gender" and "royalty" appear to correspond todirections, allowing arithmetic like V("king") - V("man") + V("woman") = V("queen"). Examples of interpretable neurons are also cases of features as directions, since the amount aneuron activates corresponds to a basis direction in the representation.
[8]
Let's call a neural network representation linear if features correspond to directions in activationspace. In a linear representation, each feature  has a corresponding representation direction .The presence of multiple features  activating with values  is represented by . To be clear, the features being represented are almost certainly nonlinearfunctions of the input. It's only the map from features to activation vectors which is linear. Note thatwhether something is a linear representation depends on what you consider to be the features.
f 
i W 
i
f ,f …1 2 x  ,x  …f 
1 f 
2
x  W +x  W ...f 
1 f 
1 f 
2 f 
2
We don't think it's a coincidence that neural networks empirically seem to have linearrepresentations. Neural networks are built from linear functions interspersed with non-linearities. Insome sense, the linear functions are the vast majority of the computation (for example, as measuredin FLOPs). Linear representations are the natural format for neural networks to representinformation in! Concretely, there are three major benefits:

--- PAGE 6 ---
Linear representations are the natural outputs of obvious algorithms a layer mightimplement. If one sets up a neuron to pattern match a particular weight template, it will firemore as a stimulus matches the template better and less as it matches it less well.
Linear representations make features "linearly accessible." A typical neural network layeris a linear function followed by a non-linearity. If a feature in the previous layer is representedlinearly, a neuron in the next layer can "select it" and have it consistently excite or inhibit thatneuron. If a feature were represented non-linearly, the model would not be able to do this in asingle step.
Statistical Efficiency. Representing features as different directions may allow non-localgeneralization in models with linear transformations (such as the weights of neural nets),increasing their statistical efficiency relative to models which can only locally generalize. Thisview is especially advocated in some of Bengio's writing (e.g. ). A more accessibleargument can be found in this blog post.
[5]
It is possible to construct non-linear representations, and retrieve information from them, if you usemultiple layers (although even these examples can be seen as linear representations with moreexotic features). We provide an example in the appendix. However, our intuition is that non-linearrepresentations are generally inefficient for neural networks.
One might think that a linear representation can only store as many features as it has dimensions,but it turns out this isn't the case! We'll see that the phenomenon we call superposition will allowmodels to store more features – potentially many more features – in linear representations.
For discussion on how this view of features squares with a conception of features as beingmultidimensional manifolds, see the appendix “What about Multidimensional Features?”.
Privileged vs Non-privileged Bases
Even if features are encoded as directions, a natural question to ask is which directions? In somecases, it seems useful to consider the basis directions, but in others it doesn't. Why is this?
When researchers study word embeddings, it doesn't make sense to analyze basis directions. Therewould be no reason to expect a basis dimension to be different from any other possible direction.One way to see this is to imagine applying some random linear transformation  to the wordembedding, and apply  to the following weights. This would produce an identical model wherethe basis dimensions are totally different. This is what we mean by a non-privileged basis. Ofcourse, it's possible to study activations without a privileged basis, you just need to identifyinteresting directions to study somehow, such as creating a gender direction in a word embeddingby taking the difference vector between "man" and "woman".
MM−1
But many neural network layers are not like this. Often, something about the architecture makes thebasis directions special, such as applying an activation function. This "breaks the symmetry",making those directions special, and potentially encouraging features to align with the basisdimensions. We call this a privileged basis, and call the basis directions "neurons." Often, theseneurons correspond to interpretable features.


--- PAGE 7 ---
From this perspective, it only makes sense to ask if a neuron is interpretable when it is in aprivileged basis. In fact, we typically reserve the word "neuron" for basis directions which are in aprivileged basis. (See longer discussion here.)
Note that having a privileged basis doesn't guarantee that features will be basis-aligned – we'll seethat they often aren't! But it's a minimal condition for the question to even make sense.
The Superposition Hypothesis
Even when there is a privileged basis, it's often the case that neurons are "polysemantic",responding to several unrelated features. One explanation for this is the superposition hypothesis.Roughly, the idea of superposition is that neural networks "want to represent more features thanthey have neurons", so they exploit a property of high-dimensional spaces to simulate a model withmany more neurons.
Several results from mathematics suggest that something like this might be plausible:
Almost Orthogonal Vectors. Although it's only possible to have  orthogonal vectors in an -dimensional space, it's possible to have  many "almost orthogonal" ( cosinesimilarity) vectors in high-dimensional spaces. See the Johnson–Lindenstrauss lemma.
Compressed sensing. In general, if one projects a vector into a lower-dimensional space,one can't reconstruct the original vector. However, this changes if one knows that the originalvector is sparse. In this case, it is often possible to recover the original vector.
nn exp(n) <ϵ
Concretely, in the superposition hypothesis, features are represented as almost-orthogonaldirections in the vector space of neuron outputs. Since the features are only almost-orthogonal, onefeature activating looks like other features slightly activating. Tolerating this "noise" or"interference" comes at a cost. But for neural networks with highly sparse features, this cost maybe outweighed by the benefit of being able to represent more features! (Crucially, sparsity greatlyreduces the costs since sparse features are rarely active to interfere with each other, and non-linearactivation functions create opportunities to filter out small amounts of noise.)
One way to think of this is that a small neural network may be able to noisily "simulate" a sparselarger model:

--- PAGE 8 ---
Although we've described superposition with respect to neurons, it can also occur inrepresentations with an unprivileged basis, such as a word embedding. Superposition simply meansthat there are more features than dimensions.
Summary: A Hierarchy of Feature Properties
The ideas in this section might be thought of in terms of four progressively more strict propertiesthat neural network representations might have.
Decomposability: Neural network activations which are decomposable can be decomposedinto features, the meaning of which is not dependent on the value of other features. (Thisproperty is ultimately the most important – see the role of decomposition in defeating thecurse of dimensionality.)
Linearity: Features correspond to directions. Each feature  has a corresponding representation direction . The presence of multiple features  activating withvalues  is represented by .
Superposition vs Non-Superposition: A linear representation exhibits superposition if  is not invertible. If  is invertible, it does not exhibit superposition.
Basis-Aligned: A representation is basis aligned if all  are one-hot basis vectors. Arepresentation is partially basis aligned if all  are sparse. This requires a privileged basis.
f 
i
W 
i f ,f …1 2
x  ,x  …f 
1 f 
2 x  W +x  W ...f 
1 f1 f 
2 f 
2
WWT WWT
W 
i
W 
i
The first two (decomposability and linearity) are properties we hypothesize to be widespread, whilethe latter (non-superposition and basis-aligned) are properties we believe only sometimes occur.
Demonstrating Superposition
If one takes the superposition hypothesis seriously, a natural first question is whether neuralnetworks can actually noisily represent more features than they have neurons. If they can't, thesuperposition hypothesis may be comfortably dismissed.
The intuition from linear models would be that this isn't possible: the best a linear model can do is tostore the principal components. But we'll see that adding just a slight nonlinearity can make modelsbehave in a radically different way! This will be our first demonstration of superposition. (It will alsobe an object lesson in the complexity of even very simple neural networks.)

--- PAGE 9 ---
Experiment Setup
Our goal is to explore whether a neural network can project a high dimensional vector  into alower dimensional vector  and then recover it. x∈Rn
h∈Rm 5
THE FEATURE VECTOR ()X
We begin by describing the high-dimensional vector : the activations of our idealized,disentangled larger model. We call each element  a "feature" because we're imagining features tobe perfectly aligned with neurons in the hypothetical larger model. In a vision model, this might be aGabor filter, a curve detector, or a floppy ear detector. In a language model, it might correspond to atoken referring to a specific famous person, or a clause being a particular kind of description.
xx 
i
Since we don't have any ground truth for features, we need to create synthetic data for  whichsimulates any important properties we believe features have from the perspective of modelingthem. We make three major assumptions:
x
Feature Sparsity: In the natural world, many features seem to be sparse in the sense thatthey only rarely occur. For example, in vision, most positions in an image don't contain ahorizontal edge, or a curve, or a dog head. In language, most tokens don't refer to MartinLuther King or aren't part of a clause describing music. This idea goes back to classicalwork on vision and the statistics of natural images (see e.g. Olshausen, 1997, the section"Why Sparseness?" ). For this reason, we will choose a sparse distribution for ourfeatures.
More Features Than Neurons: There are an enormous number of potentially useful featuresa model might represent.This imbalance between features and neurons in real modelsseems like it must be a central tension in neural network representations.
Features Vary in Importance: Not all features are equally useful to a given task. Some canreduce the loss more than others. For an ImageNet model, where classifying different speciesof dogs is a central task, a floppy ear detector might be one of the most important features itcan have. In contrast, another feature might only very slightly improve performance.
[1]
[2]
[24]
6
7
Concretely, our synthetic data is defined as follows: The input vectors  are synthetic data intendedto simulate the properties we believe the true underlying features of our task have. We considereach dimension  to be a "feature". Each one has an associated sparsity  and importance . Welet  with probability , but is otherwise uniformly distributed between .In practice, wefocus on the case where all features have the same sparsity, .
x
x 
i S 
i I 
i
x =0i S 
i [0,1]8
S =Si

--- PAGE 10 ---
THE MODEL ( )
We will actually consider two models, which we motivate below. The first "linear model" is a wellunderstood baseline which does not exhibit superposition. The second "ReLU output model" is avery simple model which does exhibit superposition. The two models vary only in the final activationfunction.
X→X′
Linear Model ReLU Output Model
h = Wxx = Wh + b′ T
x = WWx + b′ T
h = Wxx = ReLU(Wh+b)′ T
x = ReLU(WWx+b)′ T
Why these models?
The superposition hypothesis suggests that each feature in the higher-dimensional modelcorresponds to a direction in the lower-dimensional space. This means we can represent the downprojection as a linear map . Note that each column  corresponds to the direction in thelower-dimensional space that represents a feature .h=Wx W 
i
x 
i
To recover the original vector, we'll use the transpose of the same matrix . This has theadvantage of avoiding any ambiguity regarding what direction in the lower-dimensional space reallycorresponds to a feature. It also seems relatively mathematically principled, and empirically works.
WT
9
We also add a bias. One motivation for this is that it allows the model to set features it doesn'trepresent to their expected value. But we'll see later that the ability to set a negative bias isimportant for superposition for a second set of reasons – roughly, it allows models to discard smallamounts of noise.
The final step is whether to add an activation function. This turns out to be critical to whethersuperposition occurs. In a real neural network, when features are actually used by the model to docomputation, there will be an activation function, so it seems principled to include one at the end.
THE LOSS
Our loss is weighted mean squared error weighted by the feature importances, , described above:I 
i
L=   I (x −x )x∑i∑i i i′ 2
Basic Results
Our first experiment will simply be to train a few ReLU output models with different sparsity levelsand visualize the results. (We'll also train a linear model – if optimized well enough, the linear modelsolution does not depend on sparsity level.)
The main question is how to visualize the results. The simplest way is to visualize  (a featuresby features matrix) and  (a feature length vector). Note that features are arranged from mostimportant to least, so the results have a fairly nice structure. Here's an example of what this type ofvisualization might look like, for a small model model ( ) which behaves in the"expected linear model-like" way, only representing as many features as it has dimensions:
WWT
b
n=20; m=5;

--- PAGE 11 ---
But the thing we really care about is this hypothesized phenomenon of superposition – does themodel represent "extra features" by storing them non-orthogonally? Is there a way to get at it moreexplicitly? Well, one question is just how many features the model learns to represent. For anyfeature, whether or not it is represented is determined by , the norm of its embedding vector.∣∣W ∣∣i
We'd also like to understand whether a given feature shares its dimension with other features. Forthis, we calculate , projecting all other features onto the direction vector of . Itwill be  if the feature is orthogonal to other features (dark blue below). On the other hand, values  mean that there is some group of other features which can activate  as strongly as feature itself!
 (  ⋅W )∑j≠iW 
i^ j 2 W 
i
0≥1 W 
i i
We can visualize the model we looked at previously this way:
Now that we have a way to visualize models, we can start to actually do experiments.  We'll start byconsidering models with only a few features ( ). This will make it easy tovisually see what happens. We consider a linear model, and several ReLU-output models trained ondata with different feature sparsity levels:
n=20; m=5; I =0.7i i


--- PAGE 12 ---
As our standard intuitions would expect, the linear model always learns the top- most importantfeatures, analogous to learning the top principal components. The ReLU output model behaves thesame on dense features ( ), but as sparsity increases, we see superposition emerge.The model represents more features by having them not be orthogonal to each other. It starts withless important features, and gradually affects the most important ones. Initially this involvesarranging them in antipodal pairs, where one featureʼs representation vector is exactly the negativeof the otherʼs, but we observe it gradually transition to other geometric structures as it representsmore features.  We'll discuss feature geometry further in the later section, The Geometry ofSuperposition.
m
1−S=1.0
The results are qualitatively similar for models with more features and hidden dimensions. Forexample, if we consider a model with  hidden dimensions and  features (withimportance increased to  to account for having more features), we observe essentially arescaled version of the visualization above:
m=20 n=80I =0.9i i
Mathematical Understanding
In the previous section, we observed a surprising empirical result: adding a ReLU to the output ofour model allowed a radically different solution – superposition – which doesn't occur in linearmodels.
The model where it occurs is still quite mathematically simple. Can we analytically understand whysuperposition is occurring? And for that matter, why does adding a single non-linearity make thingsso different from the linear model case? It turns out that we can get a fairly satisfying answer,revealing that our model is governed by balancing two competing forces – feature benefit andinterference – which will be useful intuition going forwards. We'll also discover a connection to thefamous Thomson Problem in chemistry.
Let's start with the linear case. This is well understood by prior work! If one wants to understandwhy linear models don't exhibit superposition, the easy answer is to observe that linear modelsessentially perform PCA. But this isn't fully satisfying: if we set aside all our knowledge and intuitionabout linear functions for a moment, why exactly is it that superposition can't occur?
A deeper understanding can come from the results of Saxe et al.  who study the learningdynamics of linear neural networks – that is, neural networks without activation functions. Suchmodels are ultimately linear functions, but because they are the composition of multiple linearfunctions the dynamics are potentially quite complex. The punchline of their paper reveals thatneural network weights can be thought of as optimizing a simple closed-form solution. We cantweak their problem to be a bit more similar to our linear case,revealing the following equation:
[26]
10

--- PAGE 13 ---
The Saxe results reveal that there are fundamentally two competing forces which control learningdynamics in the considered model. Firstly, the model can attain a better loss by representing morefeatures (we've labeled this "feature benefit"). But it also gets a worse loss if it represents morethan it can fit orthogonally due to "interference" between features.In fact, this makes it neverworthwhile for the linear model to represent more features than it has dimensions.
11
12
Can we achieve a similar kind of understanding for the ReLU output model? Concretely, we'd like tounderstand   where  is distributed such that  with probability .L=  ∣∣I(x−ReLU(WWx+b))∣∣dp(x)∫x T 2 xx =0i S
The integral over  decomposes into a term for each sparsity pattern according to the binomialexpansion of . We can group terms of the sparsity together, rewriting the loss as , with each  corresponding to the loss whenthe input is a -sparse vector. Note that as ,  and  dominate. The  term,corresponding to the loss on a zero vector, is just a penalty on positive biases, . Sothe interesting term is , the loss on -sparse vectors:
x((1−S)+S)n
L=(1−S)L +…+n n (1−S)S L +SL 
n−1 1 n 0 L 
k
k S→1L 
1 L 
0 L 
0
 ReLU(b )∑i i 2
L 
1 1
This new equation is vaguely similar to the famous Thomson problem in chemistry. In particular, ifwe assume uniform importance and that there are a fixed number of features with  andthe rest have , and that , then the feature benefit term is constant and theinterference term becomes a generalized Thomson problem – we're just packing points on thesurface of the sphere with a slightly unusual energy function. (We'll see this can be a productiveanalogy when we resume our empirical investigation in the following sections!)
∣∣W ∣∣=1i
∣∣W ∣∣=0i b =0i
Another interesting property is that ReLU makes negative interference free in the 1-sparse case.This explains why the solutions we've seen prefer to only have negative interference when possible.Further, using a negative bias can convert small positive interferences into essentially beingnegative interferences.

--- PAGE 14 ---
What about the terms corresponding to less sparse vectors? We leave explicitly writing these out tothe reader, but the main idea is that there are multiple compounding interferences, and the "activefeatures" can experience interference. In a later section, we'll see that features often organizethemselves into sparse interference graphs such that only a small number of features interfere withanother feature – it's interesting to note that this reduces the probability of compoundinginterference and makes the 1-sparse loss term more important relative to others.
Superposition as a Phase Change
The results in the previous section seem to suggest that there are three outcomes for a featurewhen we train a model: (1) the feature may simply not be learned; (2) the feature may be learned,and represented in superposition; or (3) the model may represent a feature with a dedicateddimension. The transitions between these three outcomes seem sharp. Possibly, there's some kindof phase change. 13
One way to understand this better is to explore if there's something like a "phase diagram" fromphysics, which could help us understand when a feature is expected to be in one of these regimes. Although we can see hints of this in our previous experiment, it's hard to really isolate what's goingon because many features are changing at once and there may be interaction effects. As a result,we set up the following experiment to better isolate the effects.
As an initial experiment, we consider models with 2 features but only 1 hidden layer dimension. Westill consider the ReLU output model, . The first feature has an importance of1.0. On one axis, we vary the importance of the 2nd "extra" feature from 0.1 to 10. On the other axis,we vary the sparsity of all features from 1.0 to 0.01. We then plot whether the 2nd "extra" feature isnot learned, learned in superposition, or learned and represented orthogonally. To reduce noise, wetrain ten models for each point and average over the results, discarding the model with the highestloss.
ReLU(WWx−b)T
We can compare this to a theoretical "toy model of the toy model" where we can get closed formsolutions for the loss of different weight configurations as a function of importance and sparsity.There are three natural ways to store 2 features in 1 dimension:  (ignore , throwingaway the extra feature),  (ignore , throwing away the first feature to give the extrafeature a dedicated dimension), and  (store the features in superposition, losing theability to represent , the combination of both features at the same time). We call this lastsolution “antipodal” because the two basis vectors  and  are mapped in oppositedirections. It turns out we can analytically determine the loss for these solutions (details can befound in this notebook).
W=[1,0] [0,1]W=[0,1] [1,0]W=[1,−1][1,1] [1,0] [0,1]

--- PAGE 15 ---
As expected, sparsity is necessary for superposition to occur, but we can see that it interacts in aninteresting way with relative feature importance. But most interestingly, there appears to be a realphase change, observed in both the empirical and theoretical diagrams! The optimal weightconfiguration discontinuously changes in magnitude and superposition. (In the theoretical model,we can analytically confirm that there's a first-order phase change: there's crossover between thefunctions, causing a discontinuity in the derivative of the optimal loss.)
We can ask this same question of embedding three features in two dimensions. This problem stillhas a single "extra feature" (now the third one) we can study, asking what happens as we vary itsimportance relative to the other two and change sparsity.
For the theoretical model, we now consider four natural solutions. We can describe solutions byasking "what feature direction did  ignore?" For example,  might just not represent the extrafeature – we'll write this . Or  might ignore one of the other features, .But the interesting thing is that there are two ways to use superposition to make antipodal pairs. Wecan put the "extra feature" in an antipodal pair with one of the others ( ) or put theother two features in superposition and give the extra feature a dedicated dimension (). Details on the closed form losses for these solutions can be found in this notebook. We do notconsider a last solution of putting all the features in joint superposition, .
W WW⊥[0,0,1] W W⊥[1,0,0]
W⊥[0,1,1] W⊥[1,1,0]
W⊥[1,1,1]

--- PAGE 16 ---
These diagrams suggest that there really is a phase change between different strategies forencoding features. However, we'll see in the next section that there's much more complex structurethis preliminary view doesn't capture.
The Geometry of Superposition
We've seen that superposition can allow a model to represent extra features, and that the numberof extra features increases as we increase sparsity. In this section, we'll investigate this relationshipin more detail, discovering an unexpected geometric story: features seem to organize themselvesinto geometric structures such as pentagons and tetrahedrons! In some ways, the structuredescribed in this section seems "too elegant to be true" and we think there's a good chance it's atleast partly idiosyncratic to the toy model we're investigating. But it seems worth investigatingbecause if anything about this generalizes to real models, it may give us a lot of leverage inunderstanding their representations.
We'll start by investigating uniform superposition, where all features are identical: independent,equally important and equally sparse. It turns out that uniform superposition has a surprisingconnection to the geometry of uniform polytopes! Later, we'll move on to investigate non-uniformsuperposition, where features are not identical. It turns out that this can be understood, at least tosome extent, as a deformation of uniform superposition.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Uniform Superposition
As mentioned above, we begin our investigation with uniform superposition, where all features havethe same importance and sparsity. We'll see later that this case has some unexpected structure, butthere's also a much more basic reason to study it: it's much easier to reason about than the non-uniform case, and has fewer variables we need to worry about in our experiments.
We'd like to understand what happens as we change feature sparsity, . Since all features areequally important, we will assume without loss of generalitythat each feature has importance  . We'll study a model with  features and  hidden dimensions, but it turns outthe number of features and hidden dimensions doesn't matter very much. In particular, it turns outthat the number of input features  doesn't matter as long as it's much larger than the number ofhidden dimensions, . And it also turns out that the number of hidden dimensions doesn'treally matter as long as we're interested in the ratio of features learned to hidden features. Doublingthe number of hidden dimensions just doubles the number of features the model learns.
S14
I =1i n=400 m=30
nn≫m
A convenient way to measure the number of features the model has learned is to look at theFrobenius norm, . Since  if a feature is represented and  if it is not,this is roughly the number of features the model has learned to represent. Conveniently, this norm isbasis-independent, so it still behaves nicely in the dense regime  where the feature basis isn'tprivileged by anything and the model represents features with arbitrary directions instead.
∣∣W∣∣  
F2 ∣∣W ∣∣ ≃1i 2 ∣∣W ∣∣ ≃0i 2
S=0
We'll plot , which we can think of as the "dimensions per feature":D=m/∣∣W∣∣  
∗ F2
Surprisingly, we find that this graph is "sticky" at  and . (This very vaguely resembles thefractional quantum Hall effect – see e.g. this diagram.) Why is this? On inspection, the  "stickypoint" seems to correspond to a precise geometric arrangement where features come in "antipodalpairs", each being exactly the negative of the other, allowing two features to be packed into eachhidden dimension. It appears that antipodal pairs are so effective that the model preferentially usesthem over a wide range of the sparsity regime.
1 1/2 1/2
It turns out that antipodal pairs are just the tip of the iceberg. Hiding underneath this curve are anumber of extremely specific geometric configurations of features.

--- PAGE 18 ---
FEATURE DIMENSIONALITY
In the previous section, we saw that there's a sticky regime where the model has "half a dimensionper feature" in some sense. This is an average statistical property of the features the modelrepresents, but it seems to hint at something interesting. Is there a way we could understand what"fraction of a dimension" a specific feature gets?
We'll define the dimensionality of the th feature, , as:
where  is the weight vector column associated with the th feature, and  is the unit version ofthat vector.
i D 
i
D  =   
i
 (  ⋅W )∑j W 
i^ j 2
∣∣W ∣∣i 2
W 
i i  W 
i^
Intuitively, the numerator represents the extent to which a given feature is represented, while thedenominator is "how many features share the dimension it is embedded in" by projecting eachfeature onto its dimension. In the antipodal case, each feature participating in an antipodal pair willhave a dimensionality of  while features which are not learned will have adimensionality of . Empirically, it seems that the dimensionality of all features add up to the numberof embedding dimensions when the features are "packed efficiently" in some sense.
D=1/(1+1)=1/20
We can now break the above plot down on a per-feature basis. This reveals many more of these"sticky points"! To help us understand this better, we're going to create a scatter plot annotatedwith some additional information:
We start with the line plot we had in the previous section.
We overlay this with a scatter plot of the individual feature dimensionalities for each feature inthe models at each sparsity level.
The feature dimensionalities cluster at certain fractions, so we draw lines for those. (It turnsout that each fraction corresponds to a specific weight geometry – we'll discuss this shortly.)
We visualize the weight geometries for a few models with a "feature geometry graph" whereeach feature is a node and edge weights are based on the absolute value of the dot productfeature embedding vectors. So features are connected if they aren't orthogonal.
Let's look at the resulting plot, and then we'll try to figure out what it's showing us:

--- PAGE 19 ---
What is going on with the points clustering at specific fractions?? We'll see shortly that the modellikes to create specific weight geometries and kind of jumps between the different configurations.
In the previous section, we developed a theory of superposition as a phase change. But everythingon this plot between 0 (not learning a feature) and 1 (dedicating a dimension to a feature) issuperposition. Superposition is what happens when features have fractional dimensionality. That isto say – superposition isn't just one thing!
How can we relate this to our original understanding of the phase change? We often think of wateras only having three phases: ice, water and steam. But this is a simplification: there are actuallymany phases of ice, often corresponding to different crystal structures (eg. hexagonal vs cubic ice).In a vaguely similar way, neural network features seem to also have many other phases within thegeneral category of "superposition."
WHY THESE GEOMETRIC STRUCTURES?
In the previous diagram, we found that there are distinct lines corresponding to dimensionality of: ¾(tetrahedron), ⅔ (triangle), ½ (antipodal pair), ⅖ (pentagon), ⅜ (square antiprism), and 0 (featurenot learned). We believe there would also be a 1 (dedicated dimension for a feature) line if not forthe fact that basis features are indistinguishable from other directions in the dense regime.
Several of these configurations may jump out as solutions to the famous Thomson problem. (Inparticular, square antiprisms are much less famous than cubes and are primarily of note for theirrole in molecular geometry due to being a Thomson problem solution.) As we saw earlier, there is avery real sense in which our model can be understood as solving a generalized version of theThomson problem. When our model chooses to represent a feature, the feature is embedded as apoint on an -dimensional sphere.m

--- PAGE 20 ---
A second clue as to what's going on is that there are lines for the Thomson solutions which areuniform polyhedra (e.g. tetrahedron), but there seem to be split lines where we'd expect to see non-uniform solutions (e.g. instead of a ⅗ line for triangular bipyramids we see a co-occurence of pointsat ⅔ for triangles and points at ½ for a antipodes). In a uniform polyhedron, all vertices have thesame geometry, and so if we embed features as them each feature has the same dimensionality. Butif we embed features as a non-uniform polyhedron, different features will have more or lessinterference with others.
In particular, many of the Thomson solutions can be understood as tegum products (an operationwhich constructs polytopes  by embedding two polytopes in orthogonal subspaces) of smalleruniform polytopes. (In the earlier graph visualizations of feature geometry, two subgraphs aredisconnected if and only if they are in different tegum factors.) As a result, we should expect theirdimensionality to actually correspond to the underlying factor uniform polytopes.
This also suggests a possible reason why we observe 3D Thomson problem solutions, despite thefact that we're actually studying a higher dimensional version of the problem. Just as many 3DThomson solutions are tegum products of 2D and 1D solutions, perhaps higher dimensionalsolutions are often tegum products of 1D, 2D, and 3D solutions.
The orthogonality of factors in tegum products has interesting implications. For the purposes ofsuperposition, it means that there can't be any "interference" across tegum-factors. This may bepreferred by the toy model: having many features interfere simultaneously could be really bad forit. (See related discussion in our earlier mathematical analysis.)
Aside: Polytopes and Low-Rank Matrices
At this point, it's worth making explicit that there's a correspondence between polytopes andsymmetric, positive-definite, low-rank matrices (i.e. matrices of the form ). Thiscorrespondence underlies the results we saw in the previous section, and is generally useful forthinking about superposition.
WWT
In some ways, the correspondence is trivial. If one has a rank- -matrix of the form ,then  is a -matrix. We can interpret the columns of  as  points in a -dimensionalspace. The place where this starts to become interesting is that it makes it clear that  isdriven by the geometry. In particular, we can see how the off-diagonal terms are driven by thegeometry of the points.
mn×n WWT
W n×m W n mWWT
Put another way, there's an exact correspondence between polytopes and strategies forsuperposition. For example, every strategy for putting three features in superposition in a 2-dimensional space corresponds to a triangle, and every triangle corresponds to such a strategy.From this perspective, it doesn't seem surprising that if we have three equally important and equallysparse features, the optimal strategy is an equilateral triangle.

--- PAGE 21 ---
This correspondence also goes the other direction. Suppose we have a rank -matrix of theform . We can characterize it by the dimensions did not represent – that is, whichdirections are orthogonal to ? For example, if we have a -matrix, we might ask whatsingle direction did  not represent? This is especially informative if we assume that  will beas "identity-like" as possible, given the constraint of not representing certain vectors.
(n−i)WWT WW (n−1)W WWT
In fact, given such a set of orthogonal vectors, we can construct a polytope by starting with  basisvectors and projecting them to a space orthogonal to the given vectors. For example, if we start inthree dimensions and then project such that , we get a triangle. More generally,setting  gives us a regular -simplex. This is interesting because it's in somesense the "minimal possible superposition." Assuming that features are equally important andsparse, the best possible direction to not represent is the fully dense vector !
n
W⊥(1,1,1)W⊥(1,1,1,...) n
(1,1,1,...)
Non-Uniform Superposition
So far, this section has focused on the geometry of uniform superposition, where all features are ofequal importance, equal sparsity, and independent. The model is essentially solving a variant of theThomson problem. Because all features are the same, solutions corresponding to uniform polyhedraget especially low loss. In this subsection, we'll study non-uniform superposition, where featuresare somehow not uniform. They may vary in importance and sparsity, or have a correlationalstructure that makes them not independent. This distorts the uniform geometry we saw earlier.
In practice, it seems like superposition in real neural networks will be non-uniform, so developing anunderstanding of it seems important. Unfortunately, we're far from a comprehensive theory of thegeometry of non-uniform superposition at this point. As a result, the goal of this section will merelybe to highlight some of the more striking phenomena we observe:
Features varying in importance or sparsity causes smooth deformation of polytopes asthe imbalance builds, up until a critical breaking point at which they snap to another polytope.
Correlated features prefer to be orthogonal, often forming in different tegum factors. As aresult, correlated features may form an orthogonal local basis. When they can't beorthogonal, they prefer to be side-by-side. In some cases correlated features merge into asingle feature: this hints at some kind of interaction between "superposition-like behavior"and "PCA-like behavior".
Anti-correlated features prefer to be in the same tegum factor when superposition isnecessary. They prefer to have negative interference, ideally being antipodal.
We attempt to illustrate these phenomena with some representative experiments below.

--- PAGE 22 ---
PERTURBING A SINGLE FEATURE
The simplest kind of non-uniform superposition is to vary one feature and leave the others uniform.As an experiment, let's consider an experiment where we represent  features in dimensions. In the uniform case, with importance  and activation density , weget a regular pentagon. But if we vary one point – in this case we'll make it more or less sparse – wesee the pentagram stretch to account for the new value. If we make it denser, activating morefrequently (yellow) the other features repel from it, giving it more space. On the other hand, if wemake it sparser, activating less frequently (blue) it takes less space and other points push towardsit.
n=5 m=2I=1 1−S=0.05
If we make it sufficiently sparse, there's a phase change, and it collapses from a pentagon to a pairof digons with the sparser point at zero. The phase change corresponds to loss curvescorresponding to the two different geometries crossing over. (This observation allows us to directlyconfirm that it is genuinely a first order phase change.)
To visualize the solutions, we canonicalize them, rotating them to align with each other in aconsistent manner.


--- PAGE 23 ---
These results seem to suggest that, at least in some cases, non-uniform superposition can beunderstood as a deformation of uniform superposition and jumping between uniform superpositionconfigurations rather than a totally different regime. Since uniform superposition has a lot ofunderstandable structure, but real world superposition is almost certainly non-uniform, this seemsvery promising!
The reason pentagonal solutions are not on the unit circle is because models reduce the effect ofpositive interference, setting a slight negative bias to cut off noise and setting their weights to  to compensate. Distance from the unit circle can be interpreted as primarilydriven by the amount of positive interference.
A note for reimplementations: optimizing with a two-dimensional hidden space makes this easier tostudy, but the actual optimization process to be really challenging from gradient descent – a lotharder than even just having three dimensions. Getting clean results required fitting each modelmultiple times and taking the solution with the lowest loss. However, there's a silver lining to this:visualizing the sub-optimal solutions on a scatter plot as above allows us to see the loss curves fordifferent geometries and gain greater insight into the phase change.
∣∣W ∣∣=1/(1−b )i i
Correlated and Anticorrelated Features
A more complicated form of non-uniform superposition occurs when there are correlations betweenfeatures. This seems essential for understanding superposition in the real world, where manyfeatures are correlated or anti-correlated.
For example, one very pragmatic question to ask is whether we should expect polysemanticneurons to group the same features together across models. If the groupings were random, youcould use this to detect polysemantic neurons, by comparing across models! However, we'll seethat correlational structure strongly influences which features are grouped together insuperposition.
The behavior seems to be quite nuanced, with a kind of "order of preferences" for how correlatedfeatures behave in superposition. The model ideally represents correlated features orthogonally, inseparate tegum factors with no interactions between them. When that fails, it prefers to arrangethem so that they're as close together as possible – it prefers positive interference betweencorrelated features over negative interference. Finally, when there isn't enough space to representall the correlated features, it will collapse them and represent their principal component instead!Conversely, when features are anti-correlated, models prefer to have them interfere, especially withnegative interference. We'll demonstrate this with a few experiments below.
SETUP FOR EXPLORING CORRELATED AND ANTICORRELATED FEATURES
Throughout this section we'll refer to "correlated feature sets" and "anticorrelated feature sets".
Correlated Feature Sets. Our correlated feature sets can be thought of as "bundles" of co-occurring features. One can imagine a highly idealized version of what might happen in an imageclassifier: there could be a bundle of features used to identify animals (fur, ears, eyes) and anotherbundle used to identify buildings (corners, windows, doors). Features from one of these bundles arelikely to appear together. Mathematically, we represent this by linking the choice of whether all thefeatures in a correlated feature set are zero or not together. Recall that we originally defined oursynthetic distribution to have features be zero with probability  and otherwise uniformlydistributed between [0,1]. We simply have the same sample determine whether they're zero.
Anticorrelated Feature Sets. One could also imagine anticorrelated features which are extremelyunlikely to occur together. To simulate these, we'll have anticorrelated feature sets where only onefeature in the set can be active at a time. To simulate this, we'll have the feature set be entirely zerowith probability , but then only have one randomly selected feature in the set be uniformlysampled from [0,1] if it's active, with the others being zero.
S
S

--- PAGE 24 ---
ORGANIZATION OF CORRELATED AND ANTICORRELATED FEATURES
For our initial investigation, we simply train a number of small toy models with correlated and anti-correlated features and observe what happens. To make this easy to study, we limit ourselves to the case where we can explicitly visualize the weights as points in 2D space. In general, suchsolutions can be understood as a collection of points on a unit circle. To make solutions easy tocompare, we rotate and flip solutions to align with each other.
m=2
LOCAL ALMOST-ORTHOGONAL BASES
It turns out that the tendency of models to arrange correlated features to be orthogonal is actuallyquite a strong phenomenon. In particular, for larger models, it seems to generate a kind of "localalmost-orthogonal basis" where, even though the model as a whole is in superposition, thecorrelated feature sets considered in isolation are (nearly) orthogonal and can be understood ashaving very little superposition.
To investigate this, we train a larger model with two sets of correlated features and visualize .WWT

--- PAGE 25 ---
If this result holds in real neural networks, it suggests we might be able to make a kind of "local non-superposition" assumption, where for certain sub-distributions we can assume that the activatingfeatures are not in superposition. This could be a powerful result, allowing us to confidently usemethods such as PCA which might not be principled to generally use in the context ofsuperposition.
COLLAPSING OF CORRELATED FEATURES
One of the most interesting properties is that there seems to be a trade off with PrincipalComponents Analysis (PCA) and superposition. If there are two correlated features  and , but themodel only has capacity to represent one, the model will represent their principal component , a sparse variable that has more impact on the loss than either individually, and ignorethe second principal component .
As an experiment, we consider six features, organized into three sets of correlated pairs. Features ineach correlated pair are represented by a given color (red, green, and blue). The correlation iscreated by having both features always activate together – they're either both zero or neither zero.(The exact non-zero values they take when they activate is uncorrelated.)
As we vary the sparsity of the features, we find that in the very sparse regime, we observesuperposition as expected, with features arranged in a hexagon and correlated features side-by-side. As we decrease sparsity, the features progressively "collapse" into their principal components.In very dense regimes, the solution becomes equivalent to PCA.
a b
(a+b)/  2 (a−b)/  2


--- PAGE 26 ---
These results seem to hint that PCA and superposition are in some sense complementary strategieswhich trade off with one another. As features become more correlated, PCA becomes a betterstrategy. As features become sparser, superposition becomes a better strategy. When features areboth sparse and correlated, mixtures of each strategy seem to occur. It would be nice to moredeeply understand this space of tradeoffs.
It's also interesting to think about this in the context of continuous equivariant features, such asfeatures which occur in different rotations.
Superposition and Learning Dynamics
The focus of this paper is how superposition contributes to the functioning of fully trained neuralnetworks, but as a brief detour it's interesting to ask how our toy models – and the resultingsuperposition – evolve over the course of training.
There are several reasons why these models seem like a particularly interesting case for studyinglearning dynamics. Firstly, unlike most neural networks, the fully trained models converge to asimple but non-trivial structure that rhymes with an emerging thread of evidence that neuralnetwork learning dynamics might have geometric weight structure that we can understand. Onemight hope that understanding the final structure would make it easier for us to understand theevolution over training. Secondly, superposition hints at surprisingly discrete structure (regularpolytopes of all things!). We'll find that the underlying learning dynamics are also surprisinglydiscrete, continuing an emerging trend of evidence that neural network learning might be lesscontinuous than it seems. Finally, since superposition has significant implications for interpretability,it would be nice to understand how it emerges over training – should we expect models to usesuperposition early on, or is it something that only emerges later in training, as models struggle tofit more features in?
Unfortunately, we aren't able to give these questions the detailed investigation they deserve withinthe scope of this paper. Instead, we'll limit ourselves to a couple particularly striking phenomenawe've noticed, leaving more detailed investigation for future work.
PHENOMENON 1: DISCRETE "ENERGY LEVEL" JUMPS
Perhaps the most striking phenomenon we've noticed is that the learning dynamics of toy modelswith large numbers of features appear to be dominated by "energy level jumps" where featuresjump between different feature dimensionalities. (Recall that a feature's dimensionality is thefraction of a dimension dedicated to representing a feature.)
Let's consider the problem setup we studied when investigating the geometry of uniformsuperposition in the previous section, where we have a large number of features of equalimportance and sparsity. As we saw previously, the features ultimately arrange themselves into asmall number of polytopes with fractional dimensionalities.
A natural question to ask is what happens to these feature dimensionalities over the course oftraining. Let's pick one model where all the features converge into digons and observe. In the firstplot, each colored line corresponds to the dimensionality of a single feature. The second plot showshow the loss curve changes over the same duration.

--- PAGE 27 ---
Note how the dimensionality of some features "jump" between different values and swap places. Asthis happens, the loss curve also undergoes a sudden drop (a very small one at the first jump, and alarger one at the second jump).
These results make us suspect that seemingly smooth decreases of the loss curve in larger modelsare in fact composed of many small jumps of features between different configurations. (For similarresults of sudden mechanistic changes, see Olsson et al.'s induction head phase change , andNanda and Lieberum's results on phase changes in modular arithmetic . More broadly, considerthe phenomenon of grokking .)
[27]
[28]
[29]
PHENOMENON 2: LEARNING AS GEOMETRIC TRANSFORMATIONS
Many of our toy model solutions can be understood as corresponding to geometric structures. Thisis especially easy to see and study when there are only  hidden dimensions, since we canjust directly visualize the feature embeddings as points in 3D space forming a polyhedron.
It turns out that, at least in some cases, the learning dynamics leading to these structures can beunderstood as a sequence of simple, independent geometric transformations!
One particularly interesting example of this phenomenon occurs in the context of correlatedfeatures, as studied in the previous section. Consider the problem of representing  features insuperposition within  dimensions. If we have the  features be  sets of  correlated features,we observe a really interesting pattern. The learning proceeds in distinct regimes which are visiblein the loss curve, with each regime corresponding to a distinct geometric transformation:
m=3
n=6m=3 6 2 3

--- PAGE 28 ---
(Although the last solution – an octahedron with features from different correlated sets arranged inantipodal pairs – seems to be a strong attractor, the learning trajectory visualized above appears tobe one of a few different learning trajectories that attract the model. The different trajectories varyat step C: sometimes the model gets pulled directly into the antiprism configuration from the startor organize features into antipodal pairs. Presumably this depends on which feature geometry themodel is closest to when step B ends.)
The learning dynamics we observe here seem directly related to previous findings on simplemodels.  found that two-layer neural networks, in early stages of training, tend to learn a linearapproximation to a problem. Although the technicalities of our data generation process do notprecisely match the hypotheses of their theorem, it seems likely that the same basic mechanism isat work. In our case, we see the toy network learns a linear PCA solution before moving to a betternonlinear solution. A second related finding comes from , who looked at hierarchical sets offeatures, with a data generation process similar to the one we consider. They find empirically thatcertain networks (nonlinear and deep linear) “split” embedding vectors in a manner very much likewhat we observed. They also provide a theoretical analysis in terms of the underlying dynamicalsystem. A key difference is that they focus on the topology—the branching structure of theemerging feature representations—rather than the geometry. Despite this difference, it seems likelythat their analysis could be generalized to our case.
[30]
[31]

--- PAGE 29 ---
Relationship to Adversarial Robustness
Although we're most interested in the implications of superposition for interpretability, thereappears to be a connection to adversarial examples. If one gives it a little thought, this connectioncan actually be quite intuitive.
In a model without superposition, the end-to-end weights for the first feature are:
But in a model with superposition, it's something like:
The  entries (which are solely an artifact of superposition "interference") create an obvious way foran adversary to attack the most important feature. Note that this may remain true even in the infinitedata limit: the optimal behavior of the model fit to sparse infinite data is to use superposition torepresent more features, leaving it vulnerable to attack.
To test this, we generated L2 adversarial examples (allowing a max L2 attack norm of 0.1 of theaverage input norm). We originally generated attacks with gradient descent, but found that forextremely sparse examples where ReLU neurons are in the zero regime 99% of the time, attackswere difficult, effectively due to gradient masking . Instead, we found it worked better toanalytically derive adversarial attacks by considering the optimal L2 attacks for each feature () and taking the one of these attacks which most harms modelperformance.
We find that vulnerability to adversarial examples sharply increases as superposition forms(increasing by >3x), and that the level of vulnerability closely tracks the number of features perdimension (the reciprocal of feature dimensionality).
(WW)   =  (1, 0, 0, 0, ...)T 0
(WW)   =  (1, ϵ, −ϵ, ϵ, ...)T 0
ϵ
[32]
λ(WW) /∣∣(WW) ∣∣  
T i T i 2


--- PAGE 30 ---
We're hesitant to speculate about the extent to which superposition is responsible for adversarialexamples in practice. There are compelling theories for why adversarial examples occur withoutreference to superposition (e.g. ). But it is interesting to note that if one wanted to try to arguefor a "superposition maximalist stance", it does seem like many interesting phenomena related toadversarial examples can be predicted from superposition. As seen above, superposition can beused to explain why adversarial examples exist. It also predicts that adversarially robust modelswould have worse performance, since making models robust would require giving up superpositionand representing less features. It predicts that more adversarially robust models might be moreinterpretable (see e.g. ). Finally, it could arguably predict that adversarial examples transfer (seee.g. ) if the arrangement of features in superposition is heavily influenced by which features arecorrelated or anti-correlated (see earlier results on this). It might be interesting for future work tosee how far the hypothesis that superposition is a significant contributor to adversarial examplescan be driven.
In addition to observing that superposition can cause models to be vulnerable to adversarialexamples, we briefly experimented with adversarial training to see if the relationship could be usedin the other direction to reduce superposition. To keep training reasonably efficient, we used theanalytic optimal attack against a random feature. We found that this did reduce superposition, butattacks had to be made unreasonably large (80% input L2 norm) to fully eliminate it, which didn'tseem satisfying. Perhaps stronger adversarial attacks would work better. We didn't explore thisfurther since the increased cost and complexity of adversarial training made us want to prioritizeother lines of attack on superposition first.
[33]
[34]
[35]

--- PAGE 31 ---
Superposition in a Privileged Basis
So far, we've explored superposition in a model without a privileged basis. We can rotate the hiddenactivations arbitrarily and, as long as we rotate all the weights, have the exact same model behavior.That is, for any ReLU output model with weights , we could take an arbitrary orthogonal matrix and consider the model . Since , the result would be anidentical model!
Models without a privileged basis are elegant, and can be an interesting analogue for certain neuralnetwork representations which don't have a privileged basis – word embeddings, or the transformerresidual stream. But we'd also (and perhaps primarily) like to understand neural networkrepresentations where there are neurons which do impose a privileged basis, such as transformerMLP layers or conv net neurons.
Our goal in this section is to explore the simplest toy model which gives us a privileged basis. Thereare at least two ways we could do this: we could add an activation function or apply L1 regularizationto the hidden layer. We'll focus on adding an activation function, since the representation we aremost interested in understanding is hidden layers with neurons, such as the transformer MLP layer.
This gives us the following "ReLU hidden layer" model:
We'll train this model on the same data as before.
Adding a ReLU to the hidden layer radically changes the model from an interpretability perspective.The key thing is that while  in our previous model was challenging to interpret (recall that wevisualized  rather than ),  in the ReLU hidden layer model can be directly interpreted,since it connects features to basis-aligned neurons.
We'll discuss this in much more detail shortly, but here's a comparison of weights resulting from alinear hidden layer model and a ReLU hidden layer model:
W OW=OW′ (OW)(OW)=WWT T
h = ReLU(Wx)
x = ReLU(Wh+b)′ T
WWWT WW
Recall that we think of basis elements in the input as "features," and basis elements in the middlelayer as "neurons". Thus  is a map from features to neurons.
What we see in the above plot is that the features are aligning with neurons in a structured way!Many of the neurons are simply dedicated to representing a feature! (This is the critical propertythat justifies why neuron-focused interpretability approaches – such as much of the work in theoriginal Circuits thread – can be effective in some circumstances.)
Let's explore this in more detail.
W

--- PAGE 32 ---
VISUALIZING SUPERPOSITION IN TERMS OF NEURONS
Having a privileged basis opens up new possibilities for visualizing our models. As we saw above,we can simply inspect . We can also make a per-neuron stacked bar plot where, for every neuron,we visualize its weights as a stack of rectangles on top of each other:
Each column in the stack plot visualizes one column of .
Each rectangle represents one weight entry, with height corresponding to the absolute value.
The color of each rectangle corresponds to the feature it acts on (i.e. which row of  it's in).
Negative values go below the x-axis.
The order of the rectangles is not significant.
This stack plot visualization can be nice as models get bigger. It also makes polysemantic neuronsobvious: they simply correspond to having more than one weight.
W
W
W
We'll now visualize a ReLU hidden layer toy model with  and varyingfeature sparsity levels. We chose a very small model (only 5 neurons) both for ease of visualization,and to circumvent some issues with this toy model we'll discuss below.
However, we found that these small models were harder to optimize. For each model shown, wetrained 1000 models and visualized the one with the lowest loss. Although the typical solutions areoften similar to the minimal loss solutions shown, selecting the minimal loss solutions reveals evenmore structure in how features align with neurons. It also reveals that there are ranges of sparsityvalues where the optimal solution for all models trained on data with that sparsity have the sameweight configurations.
The solutions are visualized below, both visualizing the raw  and a neuron stacked bar plot. Wecolor features in the stacked bar plot based on whether they're in superposition, and color neuronsas being monosemantic or polysemantic depending on whether they store more than one feature.Neuron order was chosen by hand (since it's arbitrary).
n=10; m=5;I=0.75i i
W

--- PAGE 33 ---


--- PAGE 34 ---
The most important thing to pay attention to is how there's a shift from monosemantic topolysemantic neurons as sparsity increases. Monosemantic neurons do exist in some regimes!Polysemantic neurons exist in others. And they can both exist in the same model! Moreover, whileit's not quite clear how to formalize this, it looks a great deal like there's a neuron-level phasechange, mirroring the feature phase changes we saw earlier.
It's also interesting to examine the structure of the polysemantic solutions, which turn out to besurprisingly structured and neuron-aligned. Features typically correspond to sets ofneurons (monosemantic neurons might be seen as the special case where features only correspondto singleton sets). There's also structure in how polysemantic neurons are. They transition frommonosemantic, to only representing a few features, to gradually representing more. However, it'sunclear how much of this is generalizable to real models.
LIMITATIONS OF THE RELU HIDDEN LAYER TOY MODEL SIMULATING IDENTITY
Unfortunately, the toy model described in this section has a significant weakness, which limits theregimes in which it shows interesting results. The issue is that the model doesn't benefit from theReLU hidden layer – it has no role except limiting how the model can encode information. If givenany chance, the model will circumvent it. For example, given a hidden layer bias, the model will setall the biases to be positive, shifting the neurons into a positive regime where they behave linearly. Ifone removes the bias, but gives the model enough features, it will simulate a bias by averaging overmany features. The model will only use the ReLU activation function if absolutely forced, which is asignificant mark against studying this toy model.
We'll introduce a model without this issue in the next section, but wanted to study this model as asimpler case study.
Computation in Superposition
So far, we've shown that neural networks can store sparse features in superposition and thenrecover them. But we actually believe superposition is more powerful than this – we think thatneural networks can perform computation entirely in superposition rather than just using it asstorage. This model will also give us a more principled way to study a privileged basis wherefeatures align with basis dimensions.
To explore this, we consider a new setup where we imagine our input and output layer to be thelayers of our hypothetical disentangled model, but have our hidden layer be a smaller layer we'reimagining to be the observed model which might use superposition. We'll then try to compute asimple non-linear function and explore whether it can use superposition to do this. Since the modelwill have (and need to use) the hidden layer non-linearity, we'll also see features align with aprivileged basis.

--- PAGE 35 ---
Specifically, we'll have the model compute . Absolute value is an appealing function tostudy because there's a very simple way to compute it with ReLU neurons: . This simple structure will make it easy for us to study thegeometry of how the hidden layer is leveraged to do computation.
Since this model needs ReLU to compute absolute value, it doesn't have the issues the model in theprevious section had with trying to avoid the activation function.
Experiment Setup
The input feature vector, , is still sparse, with each feature  having probability  of being .However, since we want to have the model compute absolute value, we need to allow it to take onnon-positive values for this to be a non-trivial task. As a result, if it is non-zero, its value is nowsampled uniformly from . The target output  is .
Following the previous section, we'll consider the "ReLU hidden layer" toy model variant, but nolonger tie the two weights to be identical:
The loss is still the mean squared error weighted by feature importances  as before.
Basic Results
With this model, it's a bit less straightforward to study how individual features get embedded;because of the ReLU on the hidden layer, we can't just study . And because  and  arenow learned independently, we can't just study columns of . We believe that with somemanipulation we could recover much of the simplicity of the earlier model by considering "positivefeatures" and "negative features" independently, but we're going to focus on another perspectiveinstead.
As we saw in the previous section, having a hidden layer activation function means that it makessense to visualize the weights in terms of neurons. We can visualize  directly or as a neuron stackplot as we did before. We can also visualize it as a graph, which can sometimes be helpful forunderstanding computation.
y=abs(x)
abs(x)=ReLU(x)+ReLU(−x)
x x 
i S 
i 0
[−1,1] y y=abs(x)
h=ReLU(W x)1
y=ReLU(Wh+b)′ 2
I 
i
W W 
2T 1 W 
2 W 
1
W 
1
W

--- PAGE 36 ---
Let's look at what happens when we train a model with  features to perform absolute value on hidden layer neurons. Without superposition, the model needs two hidden layer neurons toimplement absolute value on one feature.
The resulting model – modulo a subtle issue about rescaling input and output weights– performsabsolute value exactly as one might expect. For each input feature , it constructs a "positive side"neuron  and a "negative side" neuron . It then adds these together tocompute absolute value:
n=3m=6
15
x 
i
ReLU(x )i ReLU(−x )i
Superposition vs Sparsity
We've seen that – as expected – our toy model can learn to implement absolute value. But can ituse superposition to compute absolute value for more features? To test this, we train models with  features and  neurons and a feature importance curve , varying featuresparsity.
A couple of notes on visualization: Since we're primarily interested in understanding superpositionand polysemantic neurons, we'll show a stacked weight plot of the absolute values of weights. Thefeatures are colored by superposition. To make the diagrams easier to read, neurons are faintlycolored based on how polysemantic they are (as judged by eye based on the plots). Neuron order issorted by the importance of the largest feature.
n=100 m=40 I =0.8i i
16

--- PAGE 37 ---
Much like we saw in the ReLU hidden layer models, these results demonstrate that activationfunctions, under the right circumstances, create a privileged basis and cause features to align withbasis dimensions. In the dense regime, we end up with each neuron representing a single feature,and we can read feature values directly off of neuron activations.
However, once the features become sufficiently sparse, this model, too, uses superposition torepresent more features than it has neurons. This result is notable because it demonstrates theability of neural networks to perform computation even on data that is represented insuperposition.Remember that the model is required to use the hidden layer ReLU in order tocompute an absolute value; gradient descent manages to find solutions that usefully approximatethe computation even when each neuron encodes a mix of multiple features.
Focusing on the intermediate sparsity regimes, we find several additional qualitative behaviors thatwe find fascinatingly reminiscent of behavior that has been observed in real, full-scale neuralnetworks:
17

--- PAGE 38 ---
To begin, we find that in some regimes, many of the model's neurons will encode pure features, buta subset of them will be highly polysemantic. This is similar to the phase change we saw earlier inthe Relu output model. However, in that case, the phase change was with respect to features, withmore important features not being put in superposition. In this experiment, the neurons don't haveany intrinsic importance, but we see that the neurons representing the most important features (onthe left) tend to be monosemantic.
We find this to bear a suggestive resemblance to some previous work in vision models, which foundsome layers that contained "mostly pure" feature neurons, but with some neurons representingadditional features on a different scale.
We also note that many neurons appear to be associated with a single "primary" feature – encodedby a relatively large weight – coupled with one or more "secondary" features encoded with smaller-magnitude weights to that neuron. If we were to observe the activations of such a neuron over arange of input examples, we would find that the largest activations of that neuron were all or nearly-all associated with the presence of the "primary" feature, but that the lower-magnitude activationswere much more polysemantic.
Intriguingly, that description closely matches what researchers have found in previous work onlanguage models  – many neurons appear interpretable when we examine their strongestactivations over a dataset, but can be shown on further investigation to activate for other meaningsor patterns, often at a lower magnitude. While only suggestive, the ability of our toy model toreproduce these qualitative features of larger neural networks offers an exciting hint that thesemodels are illuminating general phenomena.
[2]
The Asymmetric Superposition Motif
If neural networks can perform computation in superposition, a natural question is to ask howexactly they're doing so. What does that look like mechanically, in terms of the weights? In thissubsection, we'll (mostly) work through one such model and see an interesting motif ofasymmetric superposition. (We use the term "motif" in the sense of the original circuit thread,inspired by its use in systems biology .)
The model we're trying to understand is shown below on the left, visualized as a neuron weightstack plot, with features corresponding to colors. The model is only doing a limited amount ofsuperposition, and many of the weights can be understood as simply implementing absolute valuein the expected way.
However, there are a few neurons doing something else…
[36]

--- PAGE 39 ---
These other neurons implement two instances of asymmetric superposition and inhibition. Eachinstance consists of two neurons:
One neuron does asymmetric superposition. In normal superposition, one might store features withequal weights (eg. ) and then have equal output weights ( ). In asymmetricsuperposition, one stores the features with different magnitudes (eg. ) and then hasreciprocal output weights (eg. ). This causes one feature to heavily interfere with theother, but avoid the other interfering with the first!
To avoid the consequences of that interference, the model has another neuron heavily inhibit thefeature in the case where there would have been positive interference. This essentially convertspositive interference (which could greatly increase the loss) into negative interference (which haslimited consequences due to the output ReLU).
W=[1,−1] W=[1,1]W=[2,− ]21
W=[  ,2]21
There are a few other weights this doesn't explain. (We believe they're effectively small conditionalbiases.) But this asymmetric superposition and inhibition pattern appears to be the primary story.

--- PAGE 40 ---
The Strategic Picture of Superposition
Although superposition is scientifically interesting, much of our interest comes from a pragmaticmotivation: we believe that superposition is deeply connected to the challenge of usinginterpretability to make claims about the safety of AI systems. In particular, it is a clear challenge tothe most promising path we see to be able to say that neural networks won't perform certainharmful behaviors or to catch "unknown unknowns" safety problems. This is because superpositionis deeply linked to the ability to identify and enumerate over all features in a model, and the ability toenumerate over all features would be a powerful primitive for making claims about model behavior.
We begin this section by describing how "solving superposition" in a certain sense is equivalent tomany strong interpretability properties which might be useful for safety. Next, we'll describe threehigh level strategies one might take to "solving superposition." Finally, we'll describe a few otheradditional strategic considerations.
Safety, Interpretability, & "Solving Superposition"
We'd like a way to have confidence that models will never do certain behaviors such as "deliberatelydeceive" or "manipulate." Today, it's unclear how one might show this, but we believe a promisingtool would be the ability to identify and enumerate over all features. The ability to have a universalquantifier over the fundamental units of neural network computation is a significant step towardssaying that certain types of circuits don't exist.It also seems like a powerful tool for addressing"unknown unknowns", since it's a way that one can fully cover network behavior, in a sense.
How does this relate to superposition? It turns out that the ability to enumerate over features isdeeply intertwined with superposition. One way to see this is to imagine a neural network with aprivileged basis and without superposition (like the monosemantic neurons found in earlyInceptionV1, e.g. ): features would simply correspond to neurons, and you could enumerate overfeatures by enumerating over neurons. The connection also goes the other way: if one has theability to enumerate over features, one can perform compressed sensing using the featuredirections to (with high probability) "unfold" a superposition models activations into those of alarger, non-superposition model.
For this reason, we'll call any method that gives us the ability to enumerate over features –and equivalently, unfold activations – a "solution to superposition". Any solution is on the table,from creating models that just don't have superposition, to identifying what directions correspondto features after the fact. We'll discuss the space of possibilities shortly.
We've motivated "solving superposition" in terms of feature enumeration, but it's worth noting that it's equivalent to (or necessary for) many other interpretability properties one might care about:
18
[1]
19

--- PAGE 41 ---
Decomposing Activation Space. The most fundamental challenge of any interpretabilityagenda is to defeat the curse of dimensionality. For mechanistic interpretability, thisultimately reduces to whether we can decompose activation space into independentlyunderstandable components, analogous to how computer program memory can bedecomposed into variables. Identifying features is what allows us to decompose the model interms of them.
Describing Activations in Terms of Pure Features. One of the most obvious casualties ofsuperposition is that we can't describe activations in terms of pure features. When featuresare relatively basis aligned, we can take an activation – say the activations for a dog head in avision model – and decompose them into individual underlying features, like a floppy ear,short golden fur, and a snout. (See the "semantic dictionary" interface in Building Blocks.) Solving superposition would allow us to do this for every model.
Understanding Weights (ie. Circuit Analysis). Neural network weights can typically only beunderstood when they're connecting together understandable features. All the circuitanalysis seen in the original circuit thread (see especially ), see specially wasfundamentally only possible because the weights connected non-polysemantic neurons. Weneed to solve superposition for this to work in general.
Even very basic approaches become perilous with superposition. It isn't justsophisticated approaches to interpretability which are harmed by superposition. Even verybasic methods one might consider become unreliable. For example, if one is concernedabout language models exhibiting manipulative behavior, one might ask if an input has asignificant cosine similarity to the representations of other examples of deceptive behavior.Unfortunately, superposition means that cosine similarity has the potential to be misleading,since unrelated features start to be embedded with positive dot products to each other.However, if we solve superposition, this won't be an issue – either we'll have a model wherefeatures align with neurons, or a way to use compressed sensing to lift features to a spacewhere they no longer have positive dot products.
[37]
[38]
Three Ways Out
At a very high level, there seem to be three potential approaches to resolving superposition:
Create models without superposition.
Find an overcomplete basis that describes how features are represented in models withsuperposition.
Hybrid approaches in which one changes models, not resolving superposition, but making iteasier for a second stage of analysis to find an overcomplete basis that describes it.
Our sense is that all of these approaches are possible if one doesn't care about having acompetitive model. For example, we believe it's possible to accomplish any of these for the toymodels described in this paper. However, as one starts to consider serious neural networks, letalone modern large language models, all of these approaches begin to look very difficult. We'lloutline the challenges we see for each approach in the following sections.
With that said, it's worth highlighting one bright spot before we focus on the challenges. You mighthave believed that superposition was something you could never fully get rid of, but that doesn'tseem to be the case. All our results seem to suggest that superposition and polysemanticity arephases with sharp transitions. That is, there may exist a regime for every model where it has nosuperposition or polysemanticity. The question is largely whether the cost of getting rid of orotherwise resolving superposition is too high.

--- PAGE 42 ---
APPROACH 1: CREATING MODELS WITHOUT SUPERPOSITION
It's actually quite easy to get rid of superposition in the toy models described in this paper, albeit atthe cost of a higher loss. Simply apply at L1 regularization term to the hidden layer activations (i.e.add  to the loss). This actually has a nice interpretation in terms of killing features below acertain importance threshold, especially if they're not basis aligned. Generalizing this to real neuralnetworks isn't trivial, but we expect it can be done.
However, it seems likely that models are significantly benefitting from superposition. Roughly, thesparser features are, the more features can be squeezed in per neuron. And many features inlanguage models seem very sparse! For example, language models know about individuals with onlymodest public presences, such as several of the authors of this paper. Presumably we only occurwith frequency significantly less than one in a million tokens. As a result, it may be the case thatsuperposition effectively makes models much bigger.
All of this paints a picture where getting rid of superposition may be fairly achievable, but doing sowill have a large performance cost. For a model with a fixed number of neurons, superposition helps– potentially a lot.
But this is only true if the constraint is thought of in terms of neurons. That is, a superposition modelwith  neurons likely has the same performance as a significantly larger monosemantic model with  neurons. But neurons aren't the fundamental constraint: flops are. In the most common modelarchitectures, flops and neurons have a strict correspondence, but this doesn't have to be the caseand it's much less clear that superposition is optimal in the broader space of possibilities.
One family of models which change the flop-neuron relationship are Mixture of Experts (MoE)models (see review  ). The intuition is that most neurons are for specialized circumstances anddon't need to activate most of the time. For example, German-specific neurons don't need toactivate on French text. Harry Potter neurons don't need to activate on scientific papers. So MoEmodels organize neurons into blocks or experts, which only activate a small fraction of the time.This effectively allows the model to have  times more neurons for a similar flop budget, given theconstraint that only  of the neurons activate in a given example and that they must activate in ablock. Put another way, MoE models can recover neuron sparsity as free flops, as long as thesparsity is organized in certain ways.
It's unclear how far this can be pushed, especially given difficult engineering constraints. But there'san obvious lower bound, which is likely too optimistic but is interesting to think about: what ifmodels only expended flops on neuron activations, and recovered the compute of all non-activatingneurons? In this world, it seems unlikely that superposition would be optimal: you could always splita polysemantic neuron into dedicated neurons for each feature with the same cost, except for thecases where there would have been interference that hurt the model anyways. Our preliminaryinvestigations comparing various types of superposition in terms of "loss reduction per activationfrequency" seem to suggest that superposition is not optimal on these terms, although itasymptotically becomes as good as dedicated feature dimensions. Another way to think of this isthat superposition exploits a gap between the sparsity of neurons and the sparsity of the underlyingfeatures; MoE eats that same gap, and so we should expect MoE models to have less superposition.
To be clear, MoE models are already well studied, and we don't think this changes the capabilitiescase for them. (If anything, superposition offers a theory for why MoE models have not proven moreeffective for capabilities when the case for them seems so initially compelling!) But if one's goal isto create competitive models that don't have superposition, MoE models become interesting tothink about. We don't necessarily think that they specifically are the right path forward – our goalhere has been to use them as an example of why we think it remains plausible there may be ways tobuild competitive superposition-free models.
APPROACH 2: FINDING AN OVERCOMPLETE BASIS
The opposite strategy of creating a superposition-free model is to take a regular model, which hassuperposition, and find an overcomplete basis describing how features are embedded after the fact.
λ∣∣h∣∣  
1
nkn
[39]
k1/k

--- PAGE 43 ---
This appears to be a relatively standard sparse coding problem, where we want to take theactivations of neural network layers and find out which directions correspond to features.
The advantage of this is that we don't need to worry about whether we're damaging modelperformance. On the other hand, many other things are harder:
Itʼs no longer easy to know how many features you have to enumerate. A monosemanticmodel represents a feature per neuron, but when finding an overcomplete basis thereʼs anadditional challenge of identifying how many features to use for it.
Solutions are no longer integrated into the surface computational structure. Neuralnetworks can be understood in terms of their surface structure – neurons, attention heads,etc – and virtual structure that implicitly emerge (e.g. virtual attention heads ). A modeldescribed by an overcomplete basis has "virtual neurons": there's a further gap between thesurface and virtual structure.
It's a different, major engineering challenge. Seriously attempting to solve superpositionby applying sparse coding to real neural nets suggests a massive sparse coding problem. Fortruly large language models, one would be starting with something like a millions (neurons)by billions (tokens) matrix and then trying to do an extremely overcomplete factorization,perhaps trying to factor it to be a thousand or more times larger. This is a major engineeringchallenge which is different from the standard distributed training challenges ML labs are setup for.
Interference is no longer pushing in your favor. If you try to train models withoutsuperposition, interference between features is pushing the training process to have lesssuperposition. If you instead try to decode superposition after the fact, whatever amount ofsuperposition is "baked in" by the training process and you don't have part of the objectivepushing in your favor.
APPROACH 3: HYBRID APPROACHES
In addition to approaches which address superposition purely at training time, or purely after thefact, it may be possible to take "hybrid approaches" which do a mixture. For example, even if onecan't change models without superposition, it may be possible to produce models withless superposition, which are then easier to decode.Alternatively, it may be possible forarchitecture changes to make finding an overcomplete basis easier or more computationallytractable in large models, separately from trying to reduce superposition.
20
[40]
21

--- PAGE 44 ---
Additional Considerations
Phase Changes as Cause For Hope. Is totally getting rid of superposition a realistic hope? Onecould easily imagine a world where it can only be asymptotically reduced, and never fully eliminated.While the results in this paper seem to suggest that superposition is hard to get rid of because it'sactually very useful, the upshot of it corresponding to a phase change is that there's a regimewhere it totally doesn't exist. If we can find a way to push models in the non-superposition regime, itseems likely it can be totally eliminated.
Any superposition-free model would be a powerful tool for research. We believe that most ofthe research risk is in whether one can make performant superposition free models, rather thanwhether it's possible to make superposition free models at all. Of course, ultimately, we need tomake performant models. But a non-performant superposition free model could still be a veryuseful research tool for studying superposition in normal models. At present, it's challenging tostudy superposition in models because we have no ground truth for what the features are. (This isalso the reason why the toy models described in this paper can be studied – we do know what thefeatures are!) If we had a superposition-free model, we may be able to use it as a ground truth tostudy superposition in regular models.
Local bases are not enough. Earlier, when we considered the geometry of non-uniformsuperposition, we observed that models often form local orthogonal bases, where co-occurringfeatures are orthogonal. This suggests a strategy for locally understanding models on sufficientlynarrow sub-distributions. However, if our goal is to eventually make useful statements about thesafety of models, we need mechanistic accounts that hold for the full distribution (and offdistribution). Local bases seem unlikely to give this to us.

--- PAGE 45 ---
Discussion
To What Extent Does Superposition Exist in Real Models?
Why are we interested in toy models? We believe they are useful proxies for studying thesuperposition we suspect might exist in real neural networks. But how can we know if they'reactually a useful toy model? Our best validation is whether their predictions are consistent withempirical observations regarding polysemanticity. To the best of our knowledge they are. Inparticular:
Polysemantic neurons exist. Polysemantic neurons form in our third model, just as they areobserved in a wide range of neural networks.
Neurons are sometimes "cleanly interpretable" and sometimes "polysemantic", oftenin the same layer. Our third model exhibits both polyemantic and non-polysemantic neurons,often at the same time. This is analogous to how real neural networks often have a mixture ofpolysemantic and non-polysemantic neurons in the same layer.
InceptionV1 has more polysemantic neurons in later layers. Empirically, the fraction ofneurons which are polysemantic in InceptionV1 increases with depth. One natural explanationis that as features become higher-level the stimuli they detect become rarer and thus sparser(for example, in vision, a high-level floppy ear feature is less common than a low-level Gaborfilter's edge). A major prediction of our model is that superposition and polysemanticityincrease as sparsity increases.
Early Transformer MLP neurons are extremely polysemantic. Our experience is thatneurons in the first MLP layer in Transformer language models are often extremelypolysemantic. If the goal of the first MLP layer is to distinguish between differentinterpretations of the same token (eg. "die" in English vs German vs Dutch vs Afrikans), suchfeatures would be very sparse and our toy model would predict lots of polysemanticity.
This doesn't mean that everything about our toy model reflects real neural networks. Our intuition isthat some of the phenomena we observe (superposition, monosemantic vs polysemantic neurons,perhaps the relationship to adversarial examples) are likely to generalize, while other phenomena(especially the geometry and learning dynamics results) are much more uncertain.
Open Questions
This paper has shown that the superposition hypothesis is true in certain toy models. But ifanything, we're left with many more questions about it than we had at the start. In this final section,we review some of the questions which strike us as most important: what do we know, and wouldwe like for future work to clarify?

--- PAGE 46 ---
Is there a statistical test for catching superposition?
How can we control whether superposition and polysemanticity occur? Put another way,can we change the phase diagram such that features don't fall into the superposition regime?Pragmatically, this seems like the most important question. L1 regularization of activations,adversarial training, and changing the activation function all seem promising.
Are there any models of superposition which have a closed-form solution? Saxe et al.  demonstrate that it's possible to create nice closed-form solutions for linear neuralnetworks. We made some progress towards this for the  ReLU output model(and Tom McGrath makes further progress in his comment), but it would be nice to solve thismore generally.
How realistic are these toy models? To what extent do they capture the importantproperties of real models with respect to superposition? How can we tell?
Can we estimate the feature importance curve or feature sparsity curve of realmodels? If one takes our toy models seriously, the most important properties forunderstanding the problem are the feature importance and sparsity curves. Is there a way wecan estimate them for real models? (Likely, this would involve training models of varying sizesor amounts of regularization, observing the loss and neuron sparsities, and trying to infersomething.)
Should we expect superposition to go away if we just scale enough? What assumptionsabout the feature importance curve and sparsity would need to be true for that to be thecase? Alternatively, should we expect superposition to remain a constant fraction ofrepresented features, or even to increase as we scale?
Are we measuring the maximally principled things? For example, what is the mostprincipled definition of superposition / polysemanticity?
How important are polysemantic neurons? If X% of the model is interpretable neurons and1-X% are polysemantic, how much should we believe we understand from understanding thex% interpretable neurons? (See also the "feature packing principle" suggested above.)
How many features should we expect to be stored in superposition? This was brieflydiscussed in the previous section. It seems like results from compressed sensing should beable to give us useful upper-bounds, but it would be nice to have a clearer understanding –and perhaps tighter bounds!
Does the apparent phase change we observe in features/neurons have any connectionto phase changes in compressed sensing?
How does superposition relate to non-robust features? An interesting paper by GabrielGoh (archive.org backup) explores features in a linear model in terms of the principalcomponents of the data. It focuses on a trade off between "usefulness" and "robustness" inthe principal component features, but it seems like one could also relate it to theinterpretability of features. How much would this perspective change if one believed thesuperposition hypothesis – could it be that the useful, non-robust features are an artifact ofsuperposition?
To what extent can neural networks "do useful computation" on features insuperposition? Is the absolute value problem representative of computation in superpositiongenerally, or idiosyncratic? What class of computation is amenable to being performed insuperposition? Does it require a sparse structure to the computation?
How does superposition change if features are not independent? Can superposition packfeatures more efficiently if they are anti-correlated?
Can models effectively use nonlinear representations? We suspect models will tend notto use them, but further experimentation could provide good evidence. See the appendix onnonlinear compression. For example investigating the representations used by autoencoderswith multi-layer encoders and decoders with really small bottlenecks on random uncorrelateddata.
[26]
n=2;m=1

--- PAGE 47 ---
Related Work
INTERPRETABLE FEATURES
Our work is inspired by research exploring the features that naturally occur in neural networks. Manymodels form at least some interpretable features. Word embeddings have semantic directions (see). There is evidence of interpretable neurons in RNNs (e.g. ), convolutional neural networks(see generally e.g. ; individual neuron families ), and in some limited cases,transformer language models (see detailed discussion in our previous paper). However this workhas also found many "polysemantic" neurons which are not interpretable as a single concept .
[8] [11, 12]
[13, 14, 41, 19] [6, 18]
[21]
SUPERPOSITION
We're aware of two separate origins of the idea of superposition in neural networks. The first is thesuperposition hypothesis explored in this paper. The existence of polysemantic neurons (describedin the previous section) led to the superposition hypothesis as one of the most plausible seemingexplanations  . This hypothesis is a kind of "feature level" superposition.
Separately, Cheung et al.  explore what one might describe as "model level" superposition: canneural network parameters represent multiple completely independent models? Their investigationis motivated by catastrophic forgetting, but seems quite related to the questions investigated in thispaper.
[1]
[7]
DISENTANGLEMENT
The goal of learning disentangled representations arises from Bengio et al.'s influential positionpaper on representation learning : "we would like our representations to disentangle the factorsof variation…  to learn representations that separate the various explanatory sources." Since then, aliterature has developed motivated by this goal, tending to focus on creating genderantive modelswhich separate out major factors of variation in their latent spaces.
[5]
Concretely, disentanglement research often explores whether one can train a VAE or GAN wherebasis dimensions correspond to the major features one might use to describe the problem (e.g.rotation, lighting, gender… as relevant). In the language of this paper, the goal is to impose a strongprivileged basis on the latent space of a generative model, which are often totally rotationallyinvariant by default. Early work often focused on semi-supervised approaches where the featureswere known in advance, but fully unsupervised approaches started to develop around 2016 
[42, 43, 44]
How does superposition relate to disentanglement? Although our investigation was motivatedprimarily by different examples, we see no reason to think that superposition doesn't also occur inthe latent spaces of generative models. If so, it may be that superposition is a major reason whydisentanglement is difficult. Superposition may allow generative models to be much more effectivethan they would otherwise be without. Put another way, disentanglement often assumes a smallnumber of important latent variables explain the data. There are clearly examples of such variables,like the orientation of objects – but what if a large number of sparse, rare, individually unimportantfeatures are collectively very important? Superposition would be the natural way for models torepresent this.22

--- PAGE 48 ---
COMPRESSED SENSING
The toy problems we consider are quite similar to the problems considered in the field ofcompressed sensing, which is also known as compressive sensing and sparse recovery. However,there are some important differences:
Compressed sensing recovers vectors by solving an optimization problem using generaltechniques, while our toy model must use a neural network layer. Compressed sensingalgorithms are, in principle, much more powerful than our toy model
Compressed sensing works using the number of non-zero entries as the measure of sparsity,while we use the probability that each dimension is zero as the sparsity. These are not whollyunrelated: concentration of measure implies that our vectors have a bounded number of non-zero entries with high probability.
Compressed sensing requires that the embedding matrix (usually called the measurementmatrix) have a certain “incoherent” structure  such as the restricted isometry property  or nullspace property . Our toy model learns the embedding matrix, and will oftensimply ignore many input dimensions to make others easier to recover.
Features in our toy model have different "importances", which means the model will oftenprefer to be able to recover “important” features more accurately, at the cost of not beingable to recover “less important” features at all.
[45]
[25] [46]
In general, our toy model is solving a similar problem using less powerful than compressed sensingalgorithms, especially because the computational model is so much more restricted (to just a singlelinear transformation and a non-linearity) compared to the arbitrary computation that might be usedby a compressed sensing algorithm.
As a result, compressed sensing lower bounds—which give lower bounds on the dimension of theembedding such that recovery is still possible—can be interpreted as giving an upper bound on theamount of superposition in our toy model. In particular, in various compressed sensing settings, onecan recover an -dimensional -sparse vector from an  dimensional projection if and only if . While the connection is not entirely straightforward, we apply onesuch result to the toy model in the appendix.
n k mm=Ω(klog(n/k))[47, 48, 49]
At first, this bound appears to allow a number of features that is exponential in  to be packed intothe -dimensional embedding space. However, in our setting, the integer  for which all vectorshave at most  non-zero entries is determined by the fixed density parameter  as . As a result, our bound is actually . Therefore,the number of features is linear in  but modulated by the sparsity. This is good news if we arehoping to eliminate superposition as a phenomenon! However, these bounds also allow for theamount of superposition to increase dramatically with sparsity – hopefully this is an artifact of thetechniques in the proofs and not an inherent barrier to reducing or eliminating superposition.
mm kk Sk=O((1−S)n) m=Ω(−n(1−S)log(1−S))m 23
A striking parallel between our toy model and compressed sensing is the existence of phasechanges.In compressed sensing, if one considers a two-dimensional space defined by thesparsity and dimensionality of the vectors, there are sharp phase changes where the vector canalmost surely be recovered in one regime and almost surely not in the other . It isn'timmediately obvious how to connect these phase changes in compressed sensing – which apply torecovery of the entire vector, rather than one particular component – to the phase changes weobserve in features and neurons. But the parallel is suspicious.
24
[50, 51]
Another interesting line of work has tried to build useful sparse recovery algorithms using neuralnetworks . While we find it useful for analysis purposes to view the toy model as a sparserecovery algorithm, so that we may apply sparse recovery lower bounds, we do not expect that thetoy model is useful for the problem of sparse recovery. However, there may be an excitingopportunity to relate our understanding of the phenomenon of superposition to these and othertechniques.
[52, 53, 54]

--- PAGE 49 ---
THEORIES OF NEURAL CODING AND REPRESENTATION
Our work explores representations in artificial “neurons”. Neuroscientists study similar questions inbiological neurons. There are a variety of theories for how information could be encoded by a groupof neurons. At one extreme is a local code, in which every individual stimulus is represented by aseparate neuron. At the other extreme is a maximally-dense distributed code, in which theinformation-theoretic capacity of the population is fully utilized, and every neuron in the populationplays a necessary role in representing every input.
One challenge in comparing our work with the neuroscience literature is that a “distributedrepresentation” seems to mean different things. Consider an overly-simplified example of apopulation of neurons, each taking a binary value of active or inactive, and a stimulus set of sixteenitems: four shapes, with four colors  (example borrowed from ). A “local code” would be one witha “red triangle” neuron, a “red square” neuron, and so on. In what sense could the representation bemade more “distributed”? One sense is by representing independent features separately — e.g. four“shape” neurons and four “color” neurons. A second sense is by representing more items thanneurons — i.e. using a binary code over four neurons to encode 2^4 = 16 stimuli. In our framework,these senses correspond to decomposability (representing stimuli as compositions of independentfeatures) and superposition (representing more features than neurons, at cost of interference iffeatures co-occur).
[4]
Decomposability doesnʼt necessarily mean each feature gets its own neuron. Instead, it could bethat each feature corresponds to a “direction in activation-space”, given scalar “activations”(which in biological neurons would be firing rate). Then, only if there is a privileged basis, “featureneurons” are incentivized to develop. In biological neurons, metabolic considerations are oftenhypothesized to induce a privileged basis, and thus a “sparse code”. This would be expected if thenervous systemʼs energy expenditure increases linearly or sublinearly with firing rate.Additionally,neurons are the units by which biological neural networks can implement non-lineartransformations, so if a feature needs to be non-linearly transformed, a “feature neuron” is a goodway to achieve that.
25
26
Any decomposable linear code that uses orthogonal feature vectors is functionally equivalent fromthe viewpoint of a linear readout. So, a code can both be “maximally distributed” — in the sense thatevery neuron participates in representing every input, making each neuron extremely polysemantic— and also have no more features than it has dimensions. In this conception, itʼs clear that a codecan be fully “distributed” and also have no superposition.
A notable difference between our work, and the neuroscience literature we have encountered, isthat we consider as a central concept the likelihood that features co-occur with some probability.A “maximally-dense distributed code” makes the most sense in the case where items never co-occur; if the network only needs to represent one item at a time, it can tolerate a very extremedegree of superposition. By contrast, a network that could plausibly need to represent all the itemsat once can do so without interference between the items if it uses a code with no superposition.One example of high feature co-occurrence could be encoding spatial frequency in a receptivefield; these visual neurons need to be able to represent white noise, which has energy at allfrequencies. An example of limited co-occurrence could be a motor “reach” task to discrete targets,far enough apart that only one can be reached at a time
27
.
One hypothesis in neuroscience is that highly compressed representations might have an importantuse in long-range communication between brain areas. Under this theory, sparserepresentations are used within a brain area to do computation, and then are compressed fortransmission across a small number of axons. Our experiments with the absolute value toy modelshows that networks can do useful computation even under a code with a moderate degree ofsuperposition. This suggests that all neural codes, not just those used for efficient communication,could plausibly be “compressed” to some degree; the regional code might not necessarily need tobe decompressed to a fully sparse one.
[57]

--- PAGE 50 ---
It's worth noting that the term "distributed representation" is also used in deep learning, and hasthe same ambiguities of meaning there. Our sense is that some influential early works (e.g. ) mayhave primarily meant the "independent features are represented independently"decomposability sense, but we believe that other work intends to suggest something similar to whatwe call superposition.
[5]

--- PAGE 51 ---
Comments & Replications
Inspired by the original Circuits Thread and Distill's Discussion Article experiment, the authorsinvited several external researchers who we had previously discussed our preliminary results with tocomment on this work. Their comments are included below.
REPLICATION & FORTHCOMING PAPER
Kshitij Sachan is a research intern at Redwood Research.
Redwood Research has been working on toy models of polysemanticity, inspired by Anthropic'swork. We plan to separately publish our results, and during our research we replicated many ofthe experiments in this paper. Specifically, we replicated all plots in the DemonstratingSuperposition and Superposition as a Phase Change sections (visualizations of the relu modelswith different sparsities and the phase diagrams) as well as the plot in The Geometry ofSuperposition – Uniform Superposition. We found the phase diagrams look quite differentdepending on the activation function, suggesting that in this toy model some activationfunctions induce more polysemanticity than others.
Original Authors' Response:  Redwood's further analysis of the superposition phase changesignificantly advanced our own understanding of the issue – we're very excited for theiranalysis to be shared with the world. We also appreciate the independent replication of ourbasic results.
REPLICATION & FURTHER RESULTS
Tom McGrath is a research scientist at DeepMind.
The results in this paper are an important contribution - they really further our theoreticalunderstanding of a phenomenon that may be central to interpretability research andunderstanding network representations more generally. Itʼs surprising that such simple settingscan produce these rich phenomena. Weʼve reproduced the experiments in the DemonstratingSuperposition  and Superposition as a Phase Change sections and have a minor additionalresult to contribute.
It is possible to exactly solve the expected loss for the ,  case of the basic ReLUoutput toy model (ignoring bias terms). The derivation is mathematically simple but somewhatlong-winded: the ‘tricksʼ are to (1) represent the sparse portion of the input distribution withdelta functions, and (2) replace the ReLu with a restriction of the domain of integration:
Making this substitution renders the integral analytically tractable, which allows us to plot thefull loss surface and solve for the loss minima directly. We show some example loss surfacesbelow:
n=2m=1
 ReLU(f(x))dx=  f(x)dx∫D ∫D∩f(x)>0

--- PAGE 52 ---
Although many of these loss surfaces (Figure 1a, 1b) have minima qualitatively similar to one ofthe network weights used in the section Superposition as a Phase Change, we also find a newphase where : weights are similar rather than antipodal. This ‘confused
featureʼ regime occurs when sparsity is low and both features are important (Figure 1c). (This isslightly similar to the behavior described in The Geometry of Superposition – Collapsing ofCorrelated Features, but occurs without the features being correlated!) Further, although thesolutions we find are often qualitatively similar to the weights used in Superposition as a PhaseChange, they can be quantitatively different, as Figure 1a shows. The transition from Figure 1ato Figure 1b is continuous: the minima moves smoothly in weight space as the degree ofsparsity alters. This explains the ‘blurryʼ region around the triple point in the phase diagram.
As Figure 1c shows, some combinations of sparsity and relative feature importance lead to losssurfaces with two minima (once the symmetry  has beenaccounted for). If this pattern holds for larger values of  and  (and we see no reason why itwould not) this could account for the Discrete "Energy Level" Jumps phenomenon as solutionshop between minima. In some cases (e.g. when parameters approach those needed for a phasetransition) the global minimum can have a considerably smaller basin of attraction than localminima. The transition between the antipodal and confused-feature solutions appears to bediscontinuous.
Original Authors' Response:  This closed form analysis of the  case isfascinating. We hadn't realized that  could be a solution without correlated
features! The clarification of the "blurry behavior" and the observation about local minima arealso very interesting. More generally, we're very grateful for the independent replication of ourcore results.
W ≃W ≃  
1 2
 21
(W ,W )→(−W ,−W )1 2 1 2
n m
n=2,m=1W ≃W ≃  
1 2
 21

--- PAGE 53 ---
REPLICATION
Jeffrey Wu and Dan Mossing are members of the Alignment team at OpenAI.
We are very excited about these toy models of polysemanticity. This work sits at a rareintersection of being plausibly very important for training more interpretable models and beingvery simple and elegant. The results have been surprisingly easy to replicate -- we havereproduced (with very little fuss) plots similar to those in the Demonstrating Superposition –Basic Results, Geometry – Feature Dimensionality, and Learning Dynamics – Discrete "EnergyLevel" Jumps sections.
Original Authors' Response:  We really appreciate this replication of our basic results. Someof our findings were quite surprising to us, and this gives us more confidence that they aren'tthe result of an idiosyncratic quirk or bug in our implementations.

--- PAGE 54 ---
Code
We provide a notebook to reproduce some of the core diagrams in this article here. (It isn't comprehensive, since weneeded to rewrite code for our experiments to run outside our codebase.) We provide a separate notebook for the
theoretical phase change diagrams.
Note that the reproductions by other researchers mentioned in comments above were not based on this code, but areinstead fully independent replications with clean code from the description in an early draft of this article.
Acknowledgments
We're extremely grateful to a number of colleagues across several organizations for their invaluable support in our writingof this paper.
Jeff Wu, Daniel Mossing, Tom McGrath, and Kshitij Sachan did independent replications of many of our experiments,
greatly increasing our confidence in our results. Kshitij Sachan's and Tom McGrath's additional investigations andinsightful questions both pushed us to clarify our understanding of the superposition phase change (both as reflected in
this paper, and in further understanding which we learned from them not captured here). Buck Shlegeris, Adam Scherlis,
and Adam Jermyn shared valuable insights into the mathematical nature of the toy problem and related work.  Adam
Jermyn also coined the term "virtual neurons."
Gabriel Goh, Neel Nanda, Vladimir Mikulik, and Nick Cammarata gave detailed feedback which improved the paper, in
addition to being motivating. Alex Dimakis, Piotr Indyk, Dan Yamins generously took time to discuss these results with us
and give advice on how they might connect to their area of expertise. Finally, we benefited from the feedback andcomments of James Bradbury, Sebastian Farquhar, Shan Carter, Patrick Mineault, Alex Tamkin, Paul Christiano, Evan
Hubinger, Ian McKenzie, and Sid Black.
Finally, we're very grateful to all our colleagues at Anthropic for their advice and support: Daniela Amodei, Jack Clark,Tom Brown, Ben Mann, Nick Joseph, Danny Hernandez, Amanda Askell, Kamal Ndousse, Andy Jones,, Timothy Telleen-
Lawton, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Jeffrey Ladish, Deep Ganguli, Liane Lovitt, Nova DasSarma, Jia Yuan Loke, Jackson
Kernion, Tom Conerly, Scott Johnston, Jamie Kerr, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Rebecca Raible, Saurav Kadavath,
Rune Kvist, Jarrah Bloomfield, Eli Tran-Johnson, Rob Gilson, Guro Khundadze, Filipe Dobreira, Ethan Perez, SamBowman, Sam Ringer, Sebastian Conybeare, Jeeyoon Hyun, Michael Sellitto, Jared Mueller, Joshua Landau, Cameron
McKinnon, Sandipan Kundu, Jasmine Brazilek, Da Yan, Robin Larson, Noemí Mercado, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini,
Jennifer Zhou, Erick Galankin, James Sully, Dustin Li, James Landis.
Author Contributions
Basic Results - The basic toy model results demonstrating the existence of superposition were done by Nelson Elhageand Chris Olah. Chris suggested the toy model and Nelson ran the experiments.
Phase Change - Chris Olah ran the empirical phase change experiments, with help from Nelson Elhage. Martin
Wattenberg introduced the theoretical model where exact losses for specific weight configurations can be computed.
Geometry - The uniform superposition geometry results were discovered by Nelson Elhage and Nicholas Schiefer, with
help from Chris Olah. Nelson discovered the original  mysterious "stickiness". Chris introduced the definition of
feature dimensionality. Nicholas and Nelson then investigated the polytopes that formed. As for non-uniformsuperposition, Martin Wattenberg performed the initial investigations of the resulting geometry, focusing on the behavior
of correlated features. Chris extended this with an investigation of the role of relative feature importance and sparsity.
m/∣∣W∣∣  
F2
Learning Dynamics - Nelson Elhage discovered the "energy level jump" phenomenon, in collaboration with Nicholas
Schiefer and Chris Olah. Martin Wattenberg discovered the "geometric transformations" phenomenon.
Adversarial Examples - Chris Olah and Catherine Olsson found evidence of a connection between superposition and
adversarial examples.
Superposition with a Privileged Basis / Doing Computation - Chris Olah did the basic investigation of superposition in
a privileged basis. Nelson Elhage, with help from Chris, investigated the "absolute value" model which provided a more
principled demonstration of superposition and showed that computation could be done while in superposition. Nelsondiscovered the "asymmetric superposition" motif.
Theory - The theoretical picture articulated over the course of this paper (especially in the "mathematical
understanding" section) was developed in conversations between all authors, but especially Chris Olah, Jared Kaplan,
Martin Wattenberg, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Tom Henighan, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Dawn Drain,Shauna Kravec, Roger Grosse, Robert Lasenby, and Sam McCandlish. Jared introduced the strategy of rewriting the loss
by grouping terms with the number of active features. Both Jared and Martin independently noticed the value of
investigating the  case as the simplest case to understand. Nicholas and Dawn clarified our understanding
of the connection to compressed sensing.
n=2;m=1

--- PAGE 55 ---
Strategic Picture - The strategic picture articulated in this paper – What does superposition mean for interpretability
and safety? What would a suitable solution be? How might one solve it? – developed in extensive conversations between
authors, and in particular Chris Olah, Tristan Hume, Nelson Elhage, Dario Amodei, Jared Kaplan. Nelson Elhagerecognized the potential importance of "enumerative safety", further articulated by Dario. Tristan brainstormed
extensively about ways one might solve superposition and pushed Chris on this topic.
Writing - The paper was primarily drafted by Chris Olah, with some sections by Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Martin
Wattenberg, and Catherine Olsson. All authors contributed to editing, with particularly significant contributions from Zac
Hatfield Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Kipply Chen, and Roger Grosse.
Illustration - The paper was primarily illustrated by Chris Olah, with help from Tristan Hume, Nelson Elhage, and
Catherine Olsson.
Citation Information
Please cite as:
Elhage, et al., "Toy Models of Superposition", Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022.
BibTeX Citation:
@article{elhage2022superposition,    title={Toy Models of Superposition},    author={Elhage, Nelson and Hume, Tristan and Olsson, Catherine and Schiefer, Nicholas and Henighan, Tom and Kravec, Shauna and Hatfield-Dodds, Zac and Lasenby, Robert and Drain, Dawn and Chen, Carol and Grosse, Roger and McCandlish, Sam and Kaplan, Jared and Amodei, Dario and Wattenberg, Martin and Olah, Christopher},    year={2022},    journal={Transformer Circuits Thread},    note={https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/toy_model/index.html} } 

--- PAGE 56 ---
Footnotes
 . Where “importance” is a scalar multiplier on mean squared error loss.[ ↩ ]
 . In the context of vision, these have ranged from low-level neurons like curve detectors and high-low frequency
detectors, to more complex neurons like oriented dog-head detectors or car detectors, to extremely abstract
neurons corresponding to famous people, emotions, geographic regions, and more. In language models, researchershave found word embedding directions such as a male-female or singular-plural direction , low-level neurons
disambiguating words that occur in multiple languages, much more abstract neurons, and "action" output neurons that
help produce certain words .[ ↩ ]
 . This definition is trickier than it seems. Specifically, something is a feature if there exists a large enough model size such
that it gets a dedicated neuron. This create a kind "epsilon-delta" like definition. Our present understanding – as we'll
see in later sections – is that arbitrarily large models can still have a large fraction of their features be in superposition.
However, for any given feature, assuming the feature importance curve isn't flat, it should eventually be given adedicated neuron. This definition can be helpful in saying that something is a feature – curve detectors are a feature
because you find them in across a range of models larger than some minimal size – but unhelpful for the much more
common case of features we only hypothesize about or observe in superposition.[ ↩ ]
 . A famous book by Lakatos  illustrates the importance of uncertainty about definitions and how important rethinking
definitions often is in the context of research. [ ↩ ]
 . This experiment setup could also be viewed as an autoencoder reconstructing .[ ↩ ]
 . A vision model of sufficient generality might benefit from representing every species of plant and animal and every
manufactured object which it might potentially see. A language model might benefit from representing each person who
has ever been mentioned in writing. These are only scratching the surface of plausible features, but already there seem
more than any model has neurons. In fact, large language models demonstrably do in fact know about people of verymodest prominence – presumably more such people than they have neurons. This point is a common argument in
discussion of the plausibility of "grandmother neurons'' in neuroscience, but seems even stronger for artificial neural
networks.[ ↩ ]
 . For computational reasons, we won't focus on it in this article, but we often imagine an infinite number of features with
importance asymptotically approaching zero.[ ↩ ]
 . The choice to have features distributed uniformly is arbitrary. An exponential or power law distribution would also be verynatural.[ ↩ ]
 . Recall that  if  is orthonormal. Although  can't be literally orthonormal, our intuition from compressed
sensing is that it will be "almost orthonormal" in the sense of Candes & Tao .[ ↩ ]
  . We have the model be , but leave  Gaussianaly distributed as in Saxe.[ ↩ ]
  . As a brief aside, it's interesting to contrast the linear model interference, , to the notion of coherence in
compressed sensing, . We can see them as the  and  norms of the same vector.[ ↩ ]
  . To prove that superposition is never optimal in a linear model, solve for the gradient of the loss being zero or consult
Saxe et al.[ ↩ ]
  . Here, we use “phase change” in the generalized sense of “discontinuous change”, rather than in the more technical sense
of a discontinuity arising in the limit of infinite system size.[ ↩ ]
  . Scaling the importance of all features by the same amount simply scales the loss, and does not change the optimalsolutions.[ ↩ ]
  . Note that there's a degree of freedom for the model in learning : We can rescale any hidden unit by scaling its row of 
 by , and its column of  by , and arrive at the same model. For consistency in the visualization, we rescale
each hidden unit before visualizing so that the largest-magnitude weight to that neuron from  has magnitude .[ ↩ ]
  . These specific values were chosen to illustrate the phenomenon we're interested in: the absolute value model learns
more easily when there are more neurons, but we wanted to keep the numbers small enough that it could be easily
visualized.[ ↩ ]
  . One question you might ask is whether we can quantify the ability of superposition to enable extra computation by
examining the loss. Unfortunately, we can't easily do this. Superposition occurs when we change the task, making it
sparser. As a result, the losses of models with different amounts of superposition are not comparable – they'remeasuring the loss on different tasks![ ↩ ]
  . Ultimately we want to say that a model doesn't implement some class of behaviors. Enumerating over all features makes
it easy to say a feature doesn't exist (e.g. "there is no 'deceptive behavior' feature") but that isn't quite what we want. Weexpect models that need to represent the world to represent unsavory behaviors. But it may be possible to build more
subtle claims such as "all 'deceptive behavior' features do not participate in circuits X, Y and Z."[ ↩ ]
  . Superposition also makes it harder to find interpretable directions in a model without a privileged basis. Withoutsuperposition, one could try to do something like the Gram–Schmidt process, progressively identifying interpretable
[6]
[18] [1]
[19]
[8]
[2]
[23]
x
W=WT −1 W W
[25]
x=WWx′ T x
 ∣W ⋅W ∣∑i≠j i J2
max  ∣W ⋅W ∣i≠j i J L2 L∞
W 
1
W 
1 α W 
2 α−1
W 
1 1

--- PAGE 57 ---
directions and then removing them to make future features easier to identify. But with superposition, one can't simply
remove a direction even if one knows that it is a feature direction.[ ↩ ]
  . More formally, given a matrix  of hidden layer activations  sampled over  stimuli, if
we believe there are  underlying features, we can try to find matrices  and  such that  is
sparse.[ ↩ ]
  . In particular, it seems like we should expect to be able to reduce superposition at least a little bit with essentially no
effect on performance, just by doing something like L1 regularization without any architectural changes.  Note that
models should have a level of superposition where the derivative of loss with respect to the amount of superposition is
zero – otherwise, they'd use more or less superposition. As a result, there should be at least some margin within whichwe can reduce the amount of superposition without affecting model performance.[ ↩ ]
  . A more subtle issue is that GANs and VAEs often assume that their latent space is Gaussianly distributed. Sparse latent
variables are very non-Gaussian, but central limit theorem means that the superposition of many such variables willgradually look more Gaussian. So the latent spaces of some generative models may in fact force models to use
superposition![ ↩ ]
  . Note that this has a nice information-theoretic interpretation:  is the surprisal of a given dimension being non-zero, and is multiplied by the expected number of non-zeros.[ ↩ ]
  . Note that in the compressed sensing case, the phase transition is in the limit as the number of dimensions becomes large
- for finite-dimensional spaces, the transition is fast but not discontinuous.[ ↩ ]
  . We havenʼt encountered a specific term in the distributed coding literature that corresponds to this hypothesis
specifically, although the idea of a “direction in activation-space” is common in the literature, which may be due to
ignorance on our part. We call this hypothesis linearity[ ↩ ]
  . Experimental evidence seems to support this[ ↩ ]
  . A related, but different, concept in the neuroscience literature is the “binding problem” in which e.g. a red triangle is
a co-occurrence of exactly one shape and exactly one color, which is not a representational challenge, but a bindingproblem arises if a decomposed code needs to represent simultaneously also a blue square — which shape feature goes
with which color feature? Our work does not engage with the binding question, merely treating this as a co-occurrence of
“blue”, “red”, “triangle”, and “square”. [ ↩ ]
H∼[d,m] = [h ,h ,…]0 1 h∼[m] dn A∼[d,n] B∼[n,m] A
log(1−S)
[55]
[56]

--- PAGE 58 ---
References
 . Zoom In: An Introduction to CircuitsOlah, C., Cammarata, N., Schubert, L., Goh, G., Petrov, M. and Carter, S., 2020. Distill. DOI: 10.23915/distill.00024.001
 . Softmax Linear Units
Elhage, N., Hume, T., Olsson, C., Nanda, N., Henighan, T., Johnston, S., ElShowk, S., Joseph, N., DasSarma, N., Mann, B.,Hernandez, D., Askell, A., Ndousse, K., Jones, A., Drain, D., Chen, A., Bai, Y., Ganguli, D., Lovitt, L., Hatfield-Dodds, Z.,
Kernion, J., Conerly, T., Kravec, S., Fort, S., Kadavath, S., Jacobson, J., Tran-Johnson, E., Kaplan, J., Clark, J., Brown, T.,
McCandlish, S., Amodei, D. and Olah, C., 2022. Transformer Circuits Thread.
 . Compressed sensing
Donoho, D.L., 2006. IEEE Transactions on information theory, Vol 52(4), pp. 1289--1306. IEEE.
 . Local vs. Distributed CodingThorpe, S.J., 1989. Intellectica, Vol 8, pp. 3--40.
 . Representation learning: A review and new perspectives
Bengio, Y., Courville, A. and Vincent, P., 2013. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, Vol 35(8),pp. 1798--1828. IEEE.
 . Curve Detectors[link]
Cammarata, N., Goh, G., Carter, S., Schubert, L., Petrov, M. and Olah, C., 2020. Distill.
 . Superposition of many models into one
Cheung, B., Terekhov, A., Chen, Y., Agrawal, P. and Olshausen, B., 2019. Advances in neural information processing
systems, Vol 32.
 . Linguistic regularities in continuous space word representations[PDF]
Mikolov, T., Yih, W. and Zweig, G., 2013. Proceedings of the 2013 conference of the north american chapter of the
association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies, pp. 746--751.
 . Linguistic regularities in sparse and explicit word representations
Levy, O. and Goldberg, Y., 2014. Proceedings of the eighteenth conference on computational natural language learning,
pp. 171--180.
  . Unsupervised representation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks
Radford, A., Metz, L. and Chintala, S., 2015. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434.
  . Visualizing and understanding recurrent networks[PDF]
Karpathy, A., Johnson, J. and Fei-Fei, L., 2015. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02078.
  . Learning to generate reviews and discovering sentiment[PDF]
Radford, A., Jozefowicz, R. and Sutskever, I., 2017. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.01444.
  . Object detectors emerge in deep scene cnns[PDF]
Zhou, B., Khosla, A., Lapedriza, A., Oliva, A. and Torralba, A., 2014. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6856.
  . Network Dissection: Quantifying Interpretability of Deep Visual Representations[PDF]Bau, D., Zhou, B., Khosla, A., Oliva, A. and Torralba, A., 2017. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
  . Understanding the role of individual units in a deep neural network
Bau, D., Zhu, J., Strobelt, H., Lapedriza, A., Zhou, B. and Torralba, A., 2020. Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences, Vol 117(48), pp. 30071--30078. National Acad Sciences.
  . On the importance of single directions for generalization[PDF]
Morcos, A.S., Barrett, D.G., Rabinowitz, N.C. and Botvinick, M., 2018. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.06959.
  . On Interpretability and Feature Representations: An Analysis of the Sentiment Neuron
Donnelly, J. and Roegiest, A., 2019. European Conference on Information Retrieval, pp. 795--802.
  . High-Low Frequency DetectorsSchubert, L., Voss, C., Cammarata, N., Goh, G. and Olah, C., 2021. Distill. DOI: 10.23915/distill.00024.005
  . Multimodal Neurons in Artificial Neural Networks
Goh, G., Cammarata, N., Voss, C., Carter, S., Petrov, M., Schubert, L., Radford, A. and Olah, C., 2021. Distill. DOI:10.23915/distill.00030
  . Convergent learning: Do different neural networks learn the same representations?
Li, Y., Yosinski, J., Clune, J., Lipson, H., Hopcroft, J.E. and others,, 2015. FE@ NIPS, pp. 196--212.
  . Feature Visualization[link]
Olah, C., Mordvintsev, A. and Schubert, L., 2017. Distill. DOI: 10.23915/distill.00007
  . Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are featuresIlyas, A., Santurkar, S., Tsipras, D., Engstrom, L., Tran, B. and Madry, A., 2019. Advances in neural information processing
systems, Vol 32.

--- PAGE 59 ---
  . Proofs and refutations
Lakatos, I., 1963. Nelson London.
  . Sparse coding with an overcomplete basis set: A strategy employed by V1?
Olshausen, B.A. and Field, D.J., 1997. Vision research, Vol 37(23), pp. 3311--3325. Elsevier.
  . Decoding by linear programmingCandes, E.J. and Tao, T., 2005. IEEE transactions on information theory, Vol 51(12), pp. 4203--4215. IEEE.
  . Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics of learning in deep linear neural networks
Saxe, A.M., McClelland, J.L. and Ganguli, S., 2014.
  . In-context Learning and Induction Heads[HTML]
Olsson, C., Elhage, N., Nanda, N., Joseph, N., DasSarma, N., Henighan, T., Mann, B., Askell, A., Bai, Y., Chen, A., Conerly,
T., Drain, D., Ganguli, D., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Hernandez, D., Johnston, S., Jones, A., Kernion, J., Lovitt, L., Ndousse, K.,Amodei, D., Brown, T., Clark, J., Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S. and Olah, C., 2022. Transformer Circuits Thread.
  . A Mechanistic Interpretability Analysis of Grokking[link]
Nanda, N. and Lieberum, T., 2022.
  . Grokking: Generalization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets
Power, A., Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Babuschkin, I. and Misra, V., 2022. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177.
  . The surprising simplicity of the early-time learning dynamics of neural networksHu, W., Xiao, L., Adlam, B. and Pennington, J., 2020. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol 33, pp.
17116--17128.
  . A mathematical theory of semantic development in deep neural networksSaxe, A.M., McClelland, J.L. and Ganguli, S., 2019. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol 116(23), pp.
11537--11546. National Acad Sciences.
  . Towards the science of security and privacy in machine learningPapernot, N., McDaniel, P., Sinha, A. and Wellman, M., 2016. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03814.
  . Adversarial spheres
Gilmer, J., Metz, L., Faghri, F., Schoenholz, S.S., Raghu, M., Wattenberg, M. and Goodfellow, I., 2018. arXiv preprintarXiv:1801.02774.
  . Adversarial robustness as a prior for learned representations
Engstrom, L., Ilyas, A., Santurkar, S., Tsipras, D., Tran, B. and Madry, A., 2019. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00945.
  . Delving into transferable adversarial examples and black-box attacks
Liu, Y., Chen, X., Liu, C. and Song, D., 2016. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02770.
  . An introduction to systems biology: design principles of biological circuitsAlon, U., 2019. CRC press. DOI: 10.1201/9781420011432
  . The Building Blocks of Interpretability[link]
Olah, C., Satyanarayan, A., Johnson, I., Carter, S., Schubert, L., Ye, K. and Mordvintsev, A., 2018. Distill. DOI:10.23915/distill.00010
  . Visualizing Weights[link]
Voss, C., Cammarata, N., Goh, G., Petrov, M., Schubert, L., Egan, B., Lim, S.K. and Olah, C., 2021. Distill. DOI:10.23915/distill.00024.007
  . A Review of Sparse Expert Models in Deep Learning
Fedus, W., Dean, J. and Zoph, B., 2022. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01667.
  . A Mathematical Framework for Transformer Circuits[HTML]
Elhage, N., Nanda, N., Olsson, C., Henighan, T., Joseph, N., Mann, B., Askell, A., Bai, Y., Chen, A., Conerly, T., DasSarma,
N., Drain, D., Ganguli, D., Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Hernandez, D., Jones, A., Kernion, J., Lovitt, L., Ndousse, K., Amodei, D.,
Brown, T., Clark, J., Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S. and Olah, C., 2021. Transformer Circuits Thread.
  . An Overview of Early Vision in InceptionV1
Olah, C., Cammarata, N., Schubert, L., Goh, G., Petrov, M. and Carter, S., 2020. Distill. DOI: 10.23915/distill.00024.002
  . beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework
Higgins, I., Matthey, L., Pal, A., Burgess, C., Glorot, X., Botvinick, M., Mohamed, S. and Lerchner, A., 2016.
  . Infogan: Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial netsChen, X., Duan, Y., Houthooft, R., Schulman, J., Sutskever, I. and Abbeel, P., 2016. Advances in neural information
processing systems, Vol 29.
  . Disentangling by factorisingKim, H. and Mnih, A., 2018. International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2649--2658.

--- PAGE 60 ---
  . Uncertainty principles and ideal atomic decomposition
Donoho, D.L., Huo, X. and others,, 2001. IEEE transactions on information theory, Vol 47(7), pp. 2845--2862. Citeseer.
  . Compressed sensing and best 𝑘 -term approximation
Cohen, A., Dahmen, W. and DeVore, R., 2009. Journal of the American mathematical society, Vol 22(1), pp. 211--231.
  . A remark on compressed sensingKashin, B.S. and Temlyakov, V.N., 2007. Mathematical notes, Vol 82(5), pp. 748--755. Springer.
  . Information-theoretic bounds on sparsity recovery in the high-dimensional and noisy setting
Wainwright, M., 2007. 2007 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 961--965.
  . Lower bounds for sparse recovery
Do Ba, K., Indyk, P., Price, E. and Woodruff, D.P., 2010. Proceedings of the twenty-first annual ACM-SIAM symposium on
Discrete Algorithms, pp. 1190--1197.
  . Neighborly polytopes and sparse solution of underdetermined linear equations
Donoho, D.L., 2005.
  . Compressed sensing: How sharp is the RIPBlanchard, J.D., Cartis, C. and Tanner, J., 2009. SIAM Rev., accepted, Vol 10, pp. 090748160.
  . A deep learning approach to structured signal recovery
Mousavi, A., Patel, A.B. and Baraniuk, R.G., 2015. 2015 53rd annual allerton conference on communication, control, andcomputing (Allerton), pp. 1336--1343.
  . Learned D-AMP: Principled neural network based compressive image recovery
Metzler, C., Mousavi, A. and Baraniuk, R., 2017. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol 30.
  . Compressed Sensing using Generative Models[HTML]
Bora, A., Jalal, A., Price, E. and Dimakis, A.G., 2017. Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vol 70, pp. 537--546. PMLR.
  . Average firing rate rather than temporal pattern determines metabolic cost of activity in thalamocortical relay neurons
Yi, G. and Grill, W., 2019. Scientific reports, Vol 9(1), pp. 6940. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-43460-8
  . Distributed representationsPlate, T., 2003. Cognitive Science, pp. 1-15.
  . Compressed Sensing, Sparsity, and Dimensionality in Neuronal Information Processing and Data Analysis[link]
Ganguli, S. and Sompolinsky, H., 2012. Annual Review of Neuroscience, Vol 35(1), pp. 485-508. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-062111-150410
Nonlinear Compression
This paper focuses on the assumption that representations are linear. But what if models donʼt use linear featuredirections to represent information? What might such a thing concretely look like?
Neural networks have nonlinearities that make it theoretically possible to compress information even more compactly
than a linear superposition. There are reasons we think models are unlikely to pervasively use nonlinear compression
schemes:
The model needs to decompress things before it can compute with them naturally: Most of the computation in
the model is linear, so this kind of compression is likely only worth it to save space in the residual stream acrossmany layers before being decompressed to be computed with linearly again.
Theyʼre probably difficult to learn: Nonlinear compression schemes may require finely tuned approximations of
discontinuities, and for the compression and decompression to line up, and may be difficult for gradient descentto learn.
They probably take enough neurons that the benefit over superposition isnʼt worth it:
Representing the piecewise linear functions in the simple example with ReLU neurons using the universal
function approximation result that each line segment takes two neurons, would require 12 neurons per Z
segment, so only starts to beat linear compression at a combined 36 neurons for the compression anddecompression.
This comparison has only one hidden dimension and dense features, which is somewhat of a degenerate
case for superposition. Superposition is much more powerful for compression of sparse features in manydimensions. We suspect in large models the scaling is in favor of superposition, although this is just
intuition and itʼs possible that scaling nonlinear compression is competitive.

--- PAGE 61 ---
Regardless of whether large models end up using nonlinear compression, it should be possible to view directions being
used with nonlinear compression as linear feature directions and reverse engineer the computation being used for
compression like any other circuit. If this kind of encoding is pervasive throughout the network then it may merit somekind of automated decoding. It shouldnʼt pose a fundamental challenge to interpretability unless the model learns a
scheme for doing complex computation while staying in a complicated nonlinear representation, which we suspect is
unlikely.
To help provide intuition, the simplest example of what a nonlinear compression scheme might look like is compressing
two [0,1) dimensions  and  into a single [0,1) dimension :x y t
t=  
Z⌊Zx⌋+y
This works by quantizing the  dimension using some integer  such that the floating point precision of  is split
between  and . This particular function needs the discontinuous floor function to compute, and the discontinuous
fmod function to invert, but models canʼt compute discontinuous functions. However itʼs possible to replace thediscontinuities with steep linear segments that are only some epsilon value wide.
x Z tx y
We can compare the mean squared error loss on random uniform dense values of  and  and see that even with
epsilons as large as  and  values as small as 3 the nonlinear compression outperforms linear compression such as
picking one of the dimensions or using the average:
x y0.1 Z
Connection between compressed sensing lower bounds and the toy model
Here, we formalize the relationship between a compressed sensing lower bound and the toy model.
Let  be the complete toy model autoencoder defined by  for an 
matrix  and an  matrix .  
We derive the following theorem:
T(x):R→Rn n T(x)=ReLU(W W x−b)2 1 m×nW 
1 n×m W 
2
Theorem 1. Suppose that the toy model recovers all  with  such that  for sufficiently small  and 
 has the  restricted isometry property. The inner dimension of the projection matrix  is .
x T(x) ∥T(x)−x∥ ≤ε2 εW 
1 (δ,k) W m=Ω(klog(n/k))
We prove this result by framing our toy model as a compressed sensing algorithm. The primary barrier to doing so is that
our optimization only searches for vectors that are close in  distance to the original vector and may not itself be exactly
-sparse. The following lemma resolves this concern through a denoising step:
ℓ 
2
k
Lemma 1. Suppose that we have a toy model  with the properties in Theorem 1. Then there exists a compressed
sensing algorithm  for the measurement matrix .
T(x)f(y):R→Rm n W 
1
Proof. We construct  as follows. First, compute , as in . This produces the vector 
 and so by supposition . Next, we threshold  to obtain  by dropping all but its  largest
entries. Lastly, we solve the optimization problem:  subject to , which is convex because  and have the same support. For sufficiently small  (specifically,  smaller than the th largest entry in ), both 
and the nearest -sparse vector to  have the same support, and so the the convex optimization problem has a unique
solution: the nearest  sparse vector to . Therefore,  is a compressed sensing algorithm for  with approximation
factor 1. .
f(y) =ReLU(W y−b)x~ 2 T(x)=T(x)x~ ∥T(x)−x∥ ≤ε2 x~ x~′ kmin  ∥x−∥x′ ′ x~′ W x=y1 ′ x′
x~′ ε ε (k+1) x x~
k xk x f W 
1
Lastly, we use the deterministic compressed sensing lower bound of Do Ba, Indyk, Price, and Woodruff :[49]

--- PAGE 62 ---
Theorem 2 (Corollary 3.1 in ). Given a  matrix  with the restricted isometry property, a sparse recovery
algorithm find a -sparse approximation  of  from  such that
for an approximation factor . If , then a sparse recovery algorithm exists only if .
[49] k×n Ak x^ x∈Rn Ax
∥x−∥ ≤C(k)  ∥x−x∥ x^1 x,∥x∥ ≤k′ ′ 0min ′ 1
C(k) C(k)=O(1) m=Ω(klog(n/k))
Theorem 1 follows directly from Lemma 1 and Theorem 2.